SECTION 3        Questions 21-30

Questions 21-26

Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.

Preparing for the end-of-year art exhibition

21 Max and Abby agree that in the art exhibition they are looking forward to

                  A showing people their work.
                  B getting feedback from their tutor.
                  C talking to other students about their displays.

22 In last years exhibition, both students were impressed by

                  A a set of metal sculptures.
                  B a series of wooden models.
                  C a collection of textile designs.

23 What has Max decided to call his display?

                  A Mother Nature
                  B Views of Farmland
                  C Seasons

24 What does Abby think will be difficult about preparing for their displays?

                  A having enough time to set it up
                  B choosing which pieces to show
                  C filling up all the available space

25 What does Abby say about the summary they have to write?

                  A She isn't sure whether people will read it.
                  B It will be difficult to keep it short enough.
                  C It will be hard to clarify the reasons for her work.

26 What aspect of the display will the students organise themselves?

                  A arranging the lighting
                  B inviting local journalists
                  C providing comment forms
Questions 27-30
Which feature do the speakers identify as particularly interesting for each of the following
exhibitions they saw?
Choose FOUR answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-F, next to questions 27-30

                                              Interesting features
                            A the realistic colours
                           B the sense of space
                           C the unusual interpretation of the theme
                           D the painting technique
                           E the variety of materials use
                           F the use of light and shade

         Exhibitions  ...................
27 On the Water       ...................
28 City Life          ...................
29 Faces              ...................
30 Moods
