SECTION 3  Questions 21 - 30

Question 21 - 26
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.

                                       Research Project

21 How did John choose the topic of his research project?
                  A He thought the information would be useful for town planning.
                  B He has a special interest in the use of public services.
                  C He read about a similar study which had been done earlier.

22 During his research, John is expecting to find that
                  A the use of public services has altered very little.
                  B a group of people has changed its habits.
                  C the most frequently used facility is the library.

23 What is the problem with using official records?
                  A They may be lacking in detail.
                  B They may not be readily available.
                  C They may be difficult to analyse.

24 What does the tutor think about John using a questionnaire to get information?
                  A He needs to do a course in questionnaire design first.
                  B He should use this method instead of looking at public records.
                  C He will find the practice he gets useful the following year.

25 Which new variable does John agree to add to his investigation?
                  A occupation
                  B income group
                  C qualifications

26 How many questionnaires will John distribute?
                  A the same number as in the previous study
                  B a greater number than he needs for analysis
                  C the number recommended in the project guidelines
Question 27 - 28

Which TWO strategies will John use to encourage people to fill out his questionnaire?
                  A using simple language
                  B delivering the questionnaires in person
                  C making the questionnaires anonymous
                  D providing returnenvelopes
                  E trialling the questionnaire on friends

Questions 29 and 30
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Which TWO pieces of advice does the tutor give John about his questionnaire?

                  A There should be a mixture of question types.
                  B Some questions should elicit personal information.
                  C There should be an introduction to explain the survey's purpose.
                  D A telephone number should be provided for queries.
                  E The questions should only take a few minutes to answer.
