PART 2                 IELTS LISTENING | TEST 11

                   Questions 11 - 20

Questions 11 - 16
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.

                                        Becoming a Millionaire

11 Arthur feels that when starting a business, mistakes should be
            A seen as an opportunity to learn.
            B predicted and minimised.
            C avoided at all costs.

12 Recent American studies found that confidence will
            A sometimes reduce people's chances of success.
            B be increased by reading self-help books.
            C ensure good results on business courses.

13 The American studies recommended that new entrepreneurs
            A listen to their colleagues' advice.
            B get professional help when things go wrong.
            C remain concentrated on their aims.

14 What does Arthur say about his own experience of marketing?
            A He relied on what he already knew.
            B He hired an expert to take care of it.
            C He realised its importance too late.

15 What does Arthur think is an important quality shared by good leaders?
            A They are ambitious for their company.
            B They can deal with difficult people.
            C They earn the respect of their workforce.

16 What does Arthur say about taking risks?
            A He advises being cautious.
            B He favours a long-term view.
            C He believes it is financially advantageous.

Listening Test 11                                                          Trang 2 / 6
                                                                       IELTS LISTENING | TEST 11

Questions 17 and 18
Choose TWO letters, A - E.

Which TWO things does Arthur say people should focus on when developing their business idea?

      A making sure the idea is original
      B offering a better deal than competitors
      C being committed to it
      D paying attention to detail
      E fixing realistic prices

Questions 19 and 20
Choose TWO letters, A - E.

Which TWO things does Arthur say helped him get his business started?
      A family support
      B getting a loan from a bank
      C good business advice
      D a favourable economic climate
      E an effective approach to business

Listening Test 11                                                      Trang 3 / 6
