PART 3             Questions 21 - 30

Questions 21 - 25

Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.

                   Climate change and allergies

21 Why is Beth unconvinced that allergies are linked to vitamin D deficiency?

        A because people's diets have improved since the 1950s
        B because most people get enough vitamin D
        C because the evidence only applies in Britain

22 Eliot explains that rising CO levels

        A will mean distribution of pollen over a wider area.
        B are having less impact on pollen than milder winters.
        C are responsible for higher quantities of pollen.

23 What does Beth say about seasonal changes?

        A There is no clear short-term trend for the arrival of spring.
        B In general, spring is likely to continue arriving early.
        C Springs are becoming milder and longer.

24 What point is made about the plant ragweed?

        A It is spreading to more countries.
        B It is the most widespread cause of allergies globally.
        C It causes the most severe type of allergy.

25 Why is tree pollen a more serious problem in cities?

        A Trees produce more pollen there.
        B There is less to absorb the tree pollen.
        C There is not enough control over tree-planting.
Questions 26 - 30

What comment is made about the seasonal changes in pollen in each of the following
European countries?

Choose FIVE answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-G, next to questions 26-
30.

                              Seasonal changes in pollen

                A greatest change recorded for oak pollen
                B changes identified for two pollen types only
                C a longer season for grass pollen
                D earlier start dates for all pollen types
                E significant change in start date of birch pollen
                F little difference in start dates
                G information only available for birch pollen

European countries

26 Austria               .......

27 France       .......

28 The Netherlands .......

29 Switzerland           .......

30 UK                    .......
