IELTS LISTENING                             TEST 4

 SECTION 3       Questions 21 - 30

Questions 21 - 26
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.

                     Farmers' Attitudes to New Developments in Agriculture

21 What does Dr Owen advise Joel to include in the title of his project?
            A the location of the farms
            B the number of farmers
            C the types of farming

22 Why has Joel decided to do face-to-face interviews?
            A to see the farmers' workplaces
            B to limit the time he spends on the project
            C to get fuller answers

23 Joel agrees to investigate how farmers get information on new developments
            A by showing them a series of pictures.
            B by asking them open questions.
            C by sending them a checklist in advance.

24 Concerning government communication with farmers, the speakers agree that
            A much of it is irrelevant.
            B it is often insufficient for farmers' needs.
            C the wording is sometimes unclear.

25 According to Joel's reading about the cost of making changes, many British farmers
            A leave investment decisions to their accountants.
            B have too little time to calculate the costs of new methods.
            C are reluctant to spend money on improvements.

26 A survey of Australian sheep farmers found that most of them
            A are usually reluctant to make changes.
            B make changes based on limited research.
            C want plenty of evidence before they make changes.

Test 4                                                                                 Trang 4 / 7
IELTS LISTENING                                                                                   TEST 4

Questions 27 - 30
What opinion is expressed about each of the following books?
Choose FOUR answers from the box and write the correct letter, A - G, next to Questions 27 - 30.

                                   Opinions

        A It's badly organised.
        B It's out of date.
        C It's clear.
        D It's essential reading.
        E It's inaccurate.
        F It's well illustrated.
        G It's boring.

Books                              .....................
27 Contemporary Farming Manual     .....................
28 Running a Small Farm            .....................
29 Agriculture and Economics       .....................
30 How to Survive in Farming

Test 4                                                    Trang 5 / 7
