SECTION 3            Questions 21 - 30

Questions 21 and 22

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Which TWO points did students most frequently make about their musical background
before starting a music degree?

A They had already composed music.
B They had several music qualifications.
C They could play more than one instrument.
D They had performed in public.
E They had had piano lessons.

Questions 23 and 24

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Which TWO points did students most frequently make about music practice?

         A They prefer to practise alone.
         B They try to practise every day.
         C They are motivated to practise by fear
         D They feel they don't do enough practice.
         E They enjoy the challenge of a difficult piece.

Questions 25 and 26

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Which TWO points were most frequently made by students about the pieces they select for
assessed performances?

         A They like to hear others performing the same pieces.
         B They like to choose little-known pieces.
         C They like to play pieces from memory.
         D They like their tutor to choose their pieces.
         E They like to choose technically demanding pieces.
Questions 27 - 30

Which comment did most students make about each of the following aspects of performance?

Choose FOUR answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-G, next to
questions 27-30.

                                           Student comments

                               A This is very beneficial.
                               B This is difficult but enjoyable.
                               C This can affect relationships.
                               D This makes them very nervous.
                               E This is time-consuming.
                               F This is easy.
                               G This happens infrequently.

         Aspects of performance                            .......
27 Performing solo                                         .......
28 Deciding which pieces to perform                        .......
29 Performing with musicians from a different genre        .......
30 Performing with musicians who play the same instrument
