IELTS LISTENING                                                                                         TEST 4

 SECTION 2                                                                   Questions 11 - 20

Questions 11 and 12
Choose TWO letters, A - E.

Which TWO kinds of people are the scholarships intended for?
      A people working as temporary staff
      B people with management experience
      C people straight from college
      D people with at least three years' experience
      E people with or without qualifications

Questions 13 and 14
Choose TWO letters, A - E.

Which TWO things does Marie say about the hospitality industry in Scotland?
      A It mainly attracts UK tourists.
      B It pays high wages.
      C It is very important for the Scottish economy.
      D It is highly regarded by visitors.
      E It is attracting a lot of investment.

Test 4                                                                       Trang 2 / 7
IELTS LISTENING                                                           TEST 4

Questions 15 - 20
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.

15 Why did Marie start working at the Rock Hotel?
            A It was the only job available.
            B She needed a job with flexible working hours.
            C She wanted a job working with people.

16 What did the scholarship application process involve?
            A giving a presentation
            B writing a report about the Rock Hotel
            C researching the role of hotel manager

17 What does Marie say about the other winners she met?
            A They were not as old as she expected.
            B They were doing a variety of jobs in the hotel sector.
            C Most of them had applied for scholarships before.

18 Marie says that at the Florida Beach Hotel, every member of staff
            A takes part in annual customer service training sessions.
            B is responsible for providing an efficient service.
            C is expected to interact with visitors.

19 What did Marie find out about people's attitude to visiting Scotland?
            A Most people would be interested in visiting it.
            B People knew a surprising amount about it.
            C People only wanted to see a limited number of places.

20 What improvement has Marie introduced at the Rock Hotel?
            A getting better feedback from customers
            B providing more information for customers
            C making contact with more customers

Test 4                                                                    Trang 3 / 7
