READING PASSAGE 1

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading Passage 1
below.

           A brome lives on: how a British grass
                         escaped extinction

An inconspicuous grass, 'interrupted brome', once thought extinct, is being reintroduced into
fields. Called interrupted brome because of the widely spaced seeds on its seedhead, this
undistinguished British grass was found nowhere else in the world. Sharp-eyed botanists of the
Victorian era were the first to notice it and by the 1920s the odd-looking grass had been found
across much of southern England.

    But its decline was dramatic. By 1972, it had vanished from its last toehold - two hay fields
at Pampisford, near Cambridge. Even the seeds stored at the Cambridge University Botanic
Gardens as an insurance policy were dead, having been mistakenly kept at room temperature.
Botanists mourned: a unique living entity was, it seemed, gone forever. But one green-fingered
botanist prevented its complete demise.

    At first, Philip Smith was unaware that the scrawny pots of grass on his bench were all that
remained of a uniquely British species. But when news of the 'extinction' of interrupted brome
finally reached him, he decided to astonish his colleagues at a meeting of the Botanical Society
in Manchester in 1979, where he was booked to talk about his research on the evolution of the
brome grasses. He pretended to believe that interrupted brome was extinct and then he
suddenly produced two enormous pots of it.

    Smith, who runs the School of Plant Sciences at the University of Edinburgh, had collected
seeds at Pampisford in 1963, shortly before the species disappeared from the wild altogether.
Ever since then, Smith had grown the grass year after year. So the hapless grass survived not
through some conservation scheme or genetic manipulation, but simply because one man was
interested in it. As Smith points out, interrupted brome is not particularly attractive and has no
commercial value. But to a plant taxonomist, that is not what makes a plant interesting.

    Interrupted brome could yet reveal how new species arise, and how they adapt to different
types of farming. Crop breeders interested in improving commercial strains of crops, as well as
conservationists interested in maintaining the gene pool, should celebrate the plant's survival,
as genetic studies could show how a sudden simple mutation* might generate an entirely new
species. Such a 'mistake' of nature might point the way to key genes that control reproduction in
grasses. Seeds from Smith's plants have been securely stored in the Millennium Seed Bank at
Wakehurst Place in Sussex. And living plants thrive at the botanical gardens at Kew, Edinburgh
and Cambridge.

    The brome's relaunch into the British countryside is next on the agenda. The conservation
organisation English Nature has included interrupted brome in its Species Recovery
Programme, and it is on track to be reintroduced into the agricultural landscape, if friendly
farmers can be found. Alas, the grass is neither pretty nor useful. As a grass, it leaves
agriculturalists cold.

    So where did it come from? Smith's research into the taxonomy of the brome grasses
suggests that interrupted brome almost certainly mutated from another weedy grass, 'soft
brome'. So close is the relationship that interrupted brome was originally deemed to be a mere
variety of soft brome by the great Victorian taxonomist Professor Hackel. But in 1895, George

* mutation: a change in the genes of a cell which may affect the structure and development of the
resultant offspring
Claridge Druce, an Oxford pharmacist with a shop in the High Street, decided that it deserved
species status, and convinced the botanical world of it.

    The brome's parentage may be clear but the timing of its birth is more obscure. A clue lies in
its need to grow as a weed in fields sown with an animal feed crop - particularly legumes such
as sainfoin, lucerne or clover, which have the additional benefit of enriching the soil. According
to agricultural historian Joan Thirsk, these legumes appeared in Britain in the early 1600s.
Seeds brought in from Europe were sown in pastures to feed livestock.

    By 1650, these legumes were increasingly used for their soil-enriching qualities, serving as
'green manure' to boost grain yields. A bestlersel of its day, Nathaniel Fiennes's Sainfoin
Improved, published in 1671, helped to spread the word. The arrival of sainfoin, clover and
lucerne set the scene for the spontaneous emergence of Britain's very own rogue grass.

    Although the credit for the 'discovery' of interrupted brome goes to a Miss A M Barnard, who
collected specimens at Odsey, Bedfordshire, in 1849, the grass had probably lurked undetected
ine Engli thsh countryside for at least a hundred years. Smith thinks it probably
evolved in the late 17th or early 18th century, once sainfoin became established. The brome's
fortunes declined dramatically over the 20th century, not least because the advent of the motor
car destroyed the market for fodder crops for horses. Today, sainfoin has all but disappeared
from the countryside, though you can sometimes spot its pretty pink flowers. These days,
artificial fertilisers have made the soil-enriching properties of legumes redundant.

    The intimate relationship with out-of-fashion crops spells trouble for anyone keen to re-
establish interrupted brome in today's countryside. Its seeds cannot survive long in the soil.
Each spring, the brome relied on farmers to re-sow its seeds with their animal feed crops; in the
days before weedkillers and sophisticated seed cleaning, the brome's seeds were sown along
with the legume seeds. But the brome's reluctance to spread by itself could have advantages,
however. Any farmer willing to foster this unique contribution to the world's flora can rest
assured that the grass will never become an invasive pest.
Questions 1 - 8

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 1-8 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE             if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE            if the statement contradicts the information

NOT GIVEN        if there is no information on this

1 Interrupted brome was last seen in the wild in 1963.

2 Philip Smith combined his exhibition of interrupted brome with a lecture.

3 Interrupted brome is currently being grown as a commercial crop.

4 Philip Smith is external consultant for English Nature.

5 Interrupted brome was known as 'soft brome' until 1895.

6 Legumes were used for two different purposes in the 17th century.

7 Interrupted brome needs to be harvested and re-sown to survive.

8 Only modern weedkillers prevent interrupted brome becoming an invasive pest.

                                                                    INVADE
                                                                    CHICKEN INVADER
Questions 9 - 13

Look at the following people (Questions 9-13) and the list of achievements below.

Match each persom with the correct achievement, A-H

Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 9-13 on your answer sheet.

9 Professor Hackel                h
10 George Claridge Druce  c
11 Joan Thirsk

12 Nathaniel Fiennes

13 A M Barnard

                          List of Achievements

A  gathered the first samples of interrupted brome.

B  predicted the extinction of interrupted brome.

C  persuaded others that interrupted brome is a separate species.

D  identified interrupted brome with legumes.

E  found interrupted brome at Pampisford.

F  encouraged farmers to plant legumes.

G  dated the arrival in Britain of sainfoin.

H  classified interrupted brome as a part of another species.
