READING PASSAGE 1

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading
Passage 1 below.

                            Effect and Cause

A chance finding by a Swiss research team explains an event that happened centuries ago
                                               around Lake Geneva

In the sixth century Gregory of Tours, a chronicler* of the Germanic people known as the
Franks, told of an extraordinary event in what is now Switzerland, where the Rhone River
spills into Lake Geneva. He wrote of a big rockfall in the year 563 AD in the vicinity of a
place called Tauredunum. The debris plunged into the river, and a great mass of water
'overwhelmed with a sudden and violent flood all that was on the banks as far as the city of
Geneva,' more than 64 kilometres across the lake. The Geneva bridge was demolished,
and several people inside the city walls of Geneva were killed. Historians and scientists
have long believed that Gregory and another chronicler, Marius of Avenches, who told a
similar tale, were describing a tsunami that raced across the lake. But there has not been
any direct evidence of it until now.

Researchers at the University of Geneva now say they have found that evidence, in the
form of a large deposit of sediment in the middle of the lake. In a study published in the
journal Nature Geoscience, they also propose the sequence of events that caused the
deadly surge. The researchers think that large boulders crashed down onto soft sediments
which had accumulated at the river mouth because of the slowing of the river's flow when it
enters the lake. These sediments formed an underwater delta that had several canyon-like
channels. When the falling rocks hit the delta they destabilised the sediments and caused
the canyons to collapse. It was this collapse that created the tsunami. The sediments from
this collapse would have been propelled towards the lake's centre.

Guy Simpson, a lecturer in the University of Geneva's Department of Geology and
Paleontology, says the thick layer of sediment, which has the same curved shape as a lens,
lies more than 305 metres down in the deepest part of the lake, and was found largely by
chance. Katrina Kremer, a University of Geneva doctoral student and the study's lead
author, had been conducting seismic soundings, searching for thin sediment layers that
might be evidence of major floods that had taken place in pre-historic times, long before the
event described by Gregory of Tours. 'But we came across this enormous deposit,'
Simpson says. 'We didn't know straight away that it was the deposit that caused the [sixth-
century] tsunami. But it was a jumbled mess of sediment. It was quite obvious that it was
deposited rapidly.'

*Chronicler: a person who writes an account of important or historical events
The researchers then took samples of the sediments and used carbon-dating techniques on
remains of leaves and other organic matter they found to determine when the deposit
formed. This narrowed the range to a period between the late fourth century and the early
seventh century. Other than the rockfall, there is no record of any special event during that
period, Simpson says.

The researchers estimated that the deposit, which is at least 9.6 kilometres long by 4.8
kilometres wide, and averages about five metres thick, contains more than 248 million cubic
metres of material. They ran multiple computer simulations showing that the collapse of that
much sediment at the mouth of the Rhone would have caused a tsunami with an estimated
height of 7.9 metres at Geneva - where it would have arrived in about 70 minutes. The
rockfall itself may have been set off by a major earthquake, as some scientists have
speculated.

Lake tsunamis, although unusual, are not unknown, says Richard Schweickert, an Emeritus
Professor of Geology at the University of Nevada in Reno, in the United States. He cites
evidence that the collapse of part of the shoreline of Lake Tahoe in northern California
within the past 20,000 years caused a tsunami with wave heights of about 30 metres. There
are two faults under the lake that could have caused an earthquake, he says and that the
collapse of the Rhone delta sediments, as calculated by the Swiss researchers, 'would
certainly be capable of moving a large amount of material into the lake.' He suggests that
the findings could be corroborated by careful mapping of the shoreline to look for unusual
deposits or erosion left behind by the giant waves.

Simpson says the Rhone delta sediments might collapse again, perhaps from an
earthquake or even their own weight. In the sixth century, Geneva was a small community,
mostly behind walls on a hill, whereas today it is home to international organisations and
about 200,000 people, many living in low-lying areas near the water. Testing the stability of
nearby slopes, and creating more detailed models of how a tsunami could affect Geneva
today, would provide a more accurate assessment of whether or not this is something the
lakeside city should be concerned about.

Most tsunamis occur in oceans and are generated by earthquakes. However, the study is a
reminder that even a landlocked nation like Switzerland is not immune to catastrophic
waves.
Questions 1-7

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 1-7 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE           if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE          if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN      if there is no information on this

1 According to Gregory of Tours, the landslide which caused the flood happened near
     Tauredunum.

2 The city of Geneva was undamaged by the tsunami that Gregory described.

3 The work of Marius of Avenches supported the idea that there was a tsunami.

4 The rocks which fell into the delta were very hard and dense.

5 Richard Schweickert has published studies on lake tsunamis that have occurred in
     several countries.

6 The shoreline of Lake Tahoe has remained unchanged for 20,000 years.

7 Parts of the population of Geneva now live closer to the lake than was the case in the
     sixth century.
Questions 8-13
Complete the flow-chart below.
Choose ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 8-13 on your answer sheet.

                     The evidence for a tsunami in Lake Geneva

     Katrina Kremer was looking for indications of prehistoric 8 ...................... that had
                                  occurred before the sixth-century event.

                    Instead her research team found a large lens-shaped deposit.

    Researchers extracted samples from the deposit and dated organic material such as
                                                9 ...................... .

  Carbon-dating confirmed that the deposit was present in the lake by the beginning of the
                                          10 ...................... century.

            The volume of the deposit was then 11 ...................... by the scientists.

     The researchers established the approximate 12 ...................... and speed of the
                             tsunami through extensive computer modelling.

                 A likely cause of the rockfall was a significant 13 ...................... .
