READING PASSAGE 1

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading Passage 1
below.

    Learning by example: evidence from studies of
                            rats and birds

A The best-known model of animal learning behaviour is probably the so-called classical
       model associated with the Russian scientist Pavlov. The key features of this model are
       stimulus, outcome, and repetition. Pavlov demonstrated that dogs could be trained to
       associate a sensory stimulus with a particular outcome, even where no natural
       association exists. In one famous experiment, dogs learned to associate the sound of
       a bell with the expectation of food. Subsequent models, such as the `operant
       conditioning' model, also involved observing animals in isolation. Recently, however,
       behavioural research has focused on how animals are equipped to learn in social
       settings. And interest in the concept of role modelling, already a popular notion for
       guiding child development, has spread to other species.

B Heyes and Galef (1996) have compiled some very interesting and accessible papers
       on social learning in mammals. One of these papers starts with an account of a school
       field trip to Israel. In a pine forest there, many pine cones were discovered which had
       been stripped to the central core. So an investigation was started which had no
       weighty theoretical intent, but was directed initially at finding out what was eating the
       nutritious pine seeds, and how they managed to get them out of the cones. The culprit
       proved to be the versatile and athletic black rat. The forest-dwelling rat used a
       standard technique, biting off each cone scale in sequence, from base to tip, following
       the spiral growth pattern of the cone.

C The investigation was then broadened, with the aim of determining how the rat
       acquires such a skill. Urban black rats were found to lack the skill and were unable to
       learn it even when they were housed with experienced cone strippers, such as those
       found in Israel. However, infants of urban mothers which were fostered by forest
       mothers acquired the skill, whereas infants of forest mothers fostered by urban
       mothers did not. Clearly, the skill is not inherited, but has to be taught.

D Further elegant experiments showed that naive adult urban rats can develop the skill if
       they are provided with cones from which the first complete spiral of scales has been
       removed, rather as people can deduce how to use a new photocopier once they have
       been shown how to switch it on. In the case of forest rats, mothers supply their infants
       with cones which they have partially stripped, thereby providing the key for acquiring
       the complete stripping skill.

E We might conclude that this is a good example of adaptive learning, but how
       economical is it? The researchers went on to determine this by measuring the oxygen
       uptake of a rat stripping a cone. The rat was placed in a metabolic chamber so that the
       amount of energy used in the cone-stripping operation could be calculated. This was
       then compared with the energy benefit of the pine seeds, as measured by a machine
       known as a calorimeter. The rat's energy expenditure proved to be less than 10% of
       the energetic value of the cone -- an acceptable profit margin.

F A paper by Bednekoff and Balda (1996) provides another example of the adaptiveness
       of social learning, this time in birds. It concerns the `seed caching' behaviour of two
       birds: Clark's Nutcracker (Nucifraga columbiana) and the Mexican Jay (Aphelocoma
       ultramarina). The former is a specialist, caching 30,000 or so seeds in scattered
       locations, from where it recovers them over the winter months. The Mexican Jay also
       caches food, but is not nearly as dependent on this as the Nutcracker. The two species
       also differ in their social structure, the Nutcracker being rather solitary, while the Jay
       forages in social groups.

G An experiment was conducted to discover not just whether a bird can remember where
       it hid a seed itself, but also if it can remember where it saw another bird hide a seed.
       The design of the experiment is slightly comical, with a cacher bird wandering about a
       room with lots of holes in the floor and hiding food in some of them, while watched by
       an observer bird perched in a cage. Two days later, cachers and observers are tested
       for their discovery rate against an estimated random performance. In the role of
       cacher, not only the Nutcracker, but also the less specialised Jay performed above the
       rate of chance. More surprisingly, however, Jay observers were as successful as Jay
       cachers, whereas Nutcracker observers did no better than chance. So it seems that,
       whereas the Nutcracker is highly adapted for remembering where it hid its own seed,
       the gregarious Mexican Jay is more adept than the Nutcracker at remembering, and so
       exploiting, the caches of other birds.
Questions 1 - 4
Reading Passage 1 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 1-4 on your answer sheet.
1 a comparison between learning in rats and learning in humans
2 an explanation of what initially prompted a research project
3 an overview of research into learning behaviour in animals
4 an analysis of cost-effectiveness

Questions 5 - 9

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 1?

In boxes 5-9 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE             if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE            if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN        if there is no information on this

5 The purpose of the field trip to Israel was to investigate the feeding habits of the black rat.

6 Pine cones are the main source of food for forest rats in Israel.

7 The forest rats in Israel had a fixed method of peeling pine cones.

8 Forest rats know instinctively how to peel pine cones.

9 In extracting pine seeds from the cones, rats use only a small proportion of the energy
    they gain from eating them.
Questions 10 - 13

Complete the summary using the list of words, A-J, below

Write the correct letter, A-J, in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet

Clark's Nutcracker and the Mexican Jay are two species of bird which store seeds in various
places for use in winter. The Jay relies 10 ............ on this habit, and is more 11 ............ in
its feeding habits. During an experiment, one bird stored seed while another 12 ............ . Of
the two species, the 13 ............ was consistently more able to find seeds which had been
stored by other birds.

A equally  B Nutcracker  C dependent
D watched  E solitary    F observer
G less     H social      I Jay
J more
