READING PASSAGE 1

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading Passage 1
below.

Sweet scent of success

Many innovations end up as failed business ventures - OzKleen presents
                          a case study of a winning formula

A Innovation and entrepreneurship, in the right mix, can bring spectacular results to a business.
     Creators tap into something which consumers cannot wait to use. Other successful
     innovators have rethought how a service is provided or the way business is done. However,
     most ideas never make it to the market. Grant Kearney, chief executive of the Innovation
     Xchange in Australia, which connects businesses to innovation networks, says he hears of
     great business ideas that he knows will never get on the market. `Ideas by themselves are
     absolutely useless,' he says. `An idea only becomes innovation when it is connected to the
     right resources and capabilities.'

B One of Australia's latest innovation successes stems from a lemon-scented bathroom
     cleaner called `Shower Power', the formula for which was concocted in a factory in Yatala,
     Queensland. In 1995, Tom Quinn and John Heron bought a struggling cleaning products
     business, OzKleen, for A$250,000. It was selling 100 different kinds of cleaning products,
     mainly in bulk. The business was not profitable, the cleaning formulas were ineffective and
     environmentally harsh, and there were few regular clients. However, by 2004, it was claimed
     that Shower Power had become the top-selling bathroom cleaning product in Australia. Over
     12 months, almost four million bottles of OzKleen's Shower Power products were sold. The
     company's turnover reached A$11 million, with 70% of business being exports. In particular,
     Shower Power was making big inroads on the British market.

C OzKleen's turnaround began when Quinn and Heron hired an industrial chemist to revitalise

the product line. Market research showed that people were looking for a better cleaner for the

bathroom, universally regarded as the hardest room in the home to clean. The company also

wanted to make the product formulas more environmentally friendly. One of Tom Quinn's

sons, Peter, began working with the chemist on the formulas, looking at the potential for

citrus-based cleaning products. He detested all the chlorine-based cleaning products that

dominated the market. Peter Quinn looked at citrus ingredients, such as orange peel, to

replace the petroleum by-products in cleaners. He is credited with finding the Shower Power

formula. `The recipe is in a vault somewhere and in my head,' he says.  The

company is the sole owner of the intellectual property.

D To begin with, Shower Power was sold only in commercial quantities, but Tom Quinn decided
     to sell it in 750ml bottles after it was so well received by customers at their retail store at
     Beenleigh, near Brisbane. Customers were travelling long distances to buy supplies. Other
     retail customers began writing to OzKleen to say how good Shower Power was. `We made a
     dummy label and went to see Woolworths (the supermarket chain),' Tom Quinn says. The
     Woolworths buyer, who was responsible for buying products to sell at the supermarket, took
     a bottle home and was able to remove a stain from her basin that had been impossible to
     shift. From that point on, she championed the product and OzKleen had its first
     supermarket order, for a pallet of Shower Power worth A$3000. `We were delighted,' says
     OzKleen's financial controller, Belinda McDonnell.
E Shower Power was released in Australian Woolworths supermarkets in 1997 and became
     the top-selling product in its category within six months. Everybody at the factory had to
     collaborate, labelling and bottling Shower Power to keep up with requirements. OzKleen
     stopped manufacturing all other products and rebuilt the business around Shower Power.
     `This stage,' recalls McDonnell, `was very tough. Cashflow was very difficult,' she says.
     OzKleen had to pay special fees to the supermarket chain for selling a `new' product, which
     also squeezed profit margins.

F OzKleen's next breakthrough came when the daughter of a Coles Myer executive used the
     product while on holiday in Queensland and convinced her father that Shower Power should
     be sold in Coles supermarkets. Despite the product's success, Peter Quinn says the
     company was wary of how long the sales would last, and hesitated to spend money on
     upgrading the manufacturing process. As a result, he remembers long periods of working
     24 hours per day to keep up with orders. Small tanks were still being used, so batches were
     small and bottles were labelled and filled manually. The privately owned OzKleen relied on
     cash flow to expand. `The equipment could not keep up with demand,' Peter Quinn says.
     Eventually, a new bottling machine was bought for A$50,000 in the hope of streamlining
     production, but this didn't work. Since then he has developed a new automated bottling
     machine that can control the amount of foam produced in the liquid, so that bottles can be
     filled more effectively. The machine was patented.

G Peter Quinn says OzKleen spends as much money as they require on research and
     development and that can be considerable sums. `If I need it, I get it. It's about doing
     something simple that no one else is doing. Most of these things are just sitting in front of
     people ... it's just seeing the opportunities.' With a tried and tested product, OzKleen
     expanded overseas and developed more Power-brand household products. `We wanted to
     export as soon as we could because we realised we had the same opportunities worldwide.'
     The Quinn and Heron families continue to be involved in managing the company. OzKleen
     has also been approached with offers to buy the company, but Tom Quinn says he is happy
     with things as they are.
Questions 1 - 5
Reading Passage 1 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 1-5 on your answer sheet.
1 an example of one family member persuading another to sell a new product
2 an account of co-operation between employees due to a sudden increase in demand
3 an account of how an improved product was created
4 the reason for a change in packaging size
5 a description of the origins of the OzKleen company

Questions 6 - 9

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 6-9 on your answer sheet.

6 Ozkeen wanted Shower Power to

A                have a pleasant-smelling fragrance.

B                be a multi-purpose cleaner.

C                have fewer ingredients than other cleaners.

D                cause less damage to the natural surroundings.

7 A decision was made to sell Shower Power in 750ml bottles because this size

A                was easy to transport.

B                would appeal to individual buyers.

C                was simple to produce.

D                would be cheap to produce.

8 What action did OzKleen take in 1997 to move the company forward?

A                It focused on making one product.

B                It employed more staff to work in production.

C                It opened its own chain of stores.

D                It borrowed more money to finance production costs.

9 Tom Quinn would like the OzKleen company to

A                cease to be a family-owned company.

B                spend less on research and more on marketing overseas.

C                maintain its current position.

D                test a greater range of products in the future.
Questions 10 - 13
Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-F, below.
Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 10-13 on your answer sheet.
10 According to Grant Kearney,
11 Tom Quinn explains how
12 Belinda McDonnell commented that
13 Peter Quinn says that

A  producing new items like Shower Power can incur unknown risks.

B  OzKleen approached a supermarket chain with a sample product.

C  a good deal of finance is necessary to investigate a new business concept.

D  the market price of an individual product determines its sales success.

E  a new product needs to be well supported to succeed.

F  finance was in short supply at the same time as Shower Power sales were

   increasing.
