READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.

    American businesses aim to support employees
                          and their families

A Companies of all sizes in the US recognize the importance of family-friendly policies,
      thanks in large part to the increasing number of people-centered entrepreneurs and
      company CEOs. Many of these go into business themselves as a result of negative
      experiences they have had in the workplace. So says Jennifer West, Managing Director
      of the Ohio-based Business Research Center, a non-profit organization dedicated to
      studying work-life balance. 'Taking a people-centered view is a good recruitment and
      retention strategy,' says West. 'Employers who care about their employees and help
      them grow take into account the full range of issues and the external pressures that
      employees have and arrange things so that people can manage their lives. These
      considerations are a conscious part of how people-centered bosses organize their
      practices and strategies.'

B One employer who exemplifies this philosophy is Stephen Harper, co-owner and CEO
      of Plastic Solutions in California. His company manufactures custom plastics, mainly for
      medical devices, and offers engineering solutions for other plastics needs. Harper
      believes in having employees who understand the business. That's why every two
      weeks, when his employees receive their salary, they also get an update about the
      company, including who their new customers are, what successes they've had, and
      what challenges they are facing. Harper also includes a 'coaching' section. This
      addresses issues like gossip, which employees sometimes indulge in around the water
      cooler or the rest rooms, and which can negatively impact on the morale of staff. He
      encourages people to work their way up in the company, and pays, at least partially, for
      educational opportunities and textbooks. His employees line up to attend his monthly
      invitation-only Business Pragmatics seminar, in which communication and other vital
      skills are taught, along with ethics and workplace morals and philosophy. The structure
      of his company is very family-friendly, and includes a regular Open House day for
      employees' families where, among other things, kids can experiment with the
      company's machines that manufacture their products and so on. The Harper philosophy
      pays off. Attrition at the company is low, and many employees remain with the company
      for much of their career.

C In Vermont, the Margaret Mills Corporation also strives to be people-centered. It is a
      third generation, family-run business that sells children's wooden toys internationally,
      and the company's founder (Margaret Mills) understood all too well the challenges of
      raising a family while running a business. Like many other like-minded companies, the
      Margaret Mills Corporation offers liberal leave, flexi-time, good health and retirement
      packages, and other benefits. The corporation also allows workers to have their
      children dropped off when school is over, or to spend time with them during the
      vacations. Annual Christmas and summer parties are standard, and this year, to
      celebrate an especially strong performance, the company took all employees and their
      families on a 2-day trip to Montreal, Canada. Says Victor Davies, Human Resources
      Director, 'We enable employees to maintain equilibrium between work and home, a
      policy which ultimately results in a more productive and stable workforce.' It works - this
      year the company will celebrate six 5-year anniversaries, and one 25-year anniversary
      among its employees.

D For Hazel Gibbs, CEO of Disposal Systems Inc. in Houston, Texas, a waste disposal
      and environmental cleanup and consultancy firm, the bottom line is keeping her
      business going. But she realizes that it takes a certain kind of mutuality to do that. 'I'm
      not altruistic,' she says, 'but if everyone understands what it takes to be in business,
      that's good for all of us.' That's why she works hard to ensure that everyone, from
      managers to workers, realizes that they count. 'It's not about 'us' and 'them', we are a
      team,' Gibbs says. 'When our employees understand what it takes to keep a business
      going, then it works and we can accommodate each other's needs.' Despite her
      success, Gibbs sometimes struggles with being taken seriously. She sees this as a
      long-term challenge. 'Working mothers still need to be taken more seriously, and so do
      mothers who are business owners.' She has two children of her own to think about.

E Family-friendly entrepreneurs are becoming more commonplace internationally, and
      they clearly influence those companies which have so far been slow to accommodate
      employee needs. According to West, it is already possible to document the dwindling
      workforces of these latter businesses, or the migration of labor to more family-friendly
      ones. What is more, parents are important consumers and investors who can change
      buying practices. Further, in the public policy arena, multinational corporations and aid
      agencies are beginning to recognize the need to integrate social and economic policy
      and practice. Family-friendly employers are creating a groundswell of awareness that
      can only result in changing business practices. And as Hazel Gibbs says, when that
      happens, 'you've got it working.'
Questions 14 - 18
Reading Passage 2 has five paragraphs, A-E.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 14-18 on your answer sheet.
14 a description of a company that provides financial assistance for employees to

      continue their learning
15 a mention of worldwide trends in the changing attitude of businesses and customers
16 details about years of continuous service by employees at one company
17 a reference to the reason why many people-centred workers first start their own

      businesses
18 a comment about how certain groups are still fighting for respect in the business world

Questions 19 - 21
Look at the following statements (Questions 19-21) and the list of business people below.
Match each statement with the correct business person, A-E.
Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 19-21 on your answer sheet.
19 Employees should be kept informed about business development and performance.

20 Work output increases when employees have a good balance between company and
      family responsibilities.

21 It is critical to business success that all company members recognise that they matter.

                                            List of Business People
                                          A Jennifer West
                                          B Stephen Harper
                                          C Margaret Mills
                                          D Victor Davies
                                          E Hazel Gibbs
Questions 22 - 26

Complete the summary below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answer in boxes 20-22 on your answer sheet.

            Family-friendly practices at Plastic Solutions and
                          the Margaret Mills Corporation

At Plastic Solutions, a bi-weekly update is issued to workers at the same time as their pay. This
includes a section dealing with problems such as 22 ............ in communal areas of the
workplace. The CEO also arranges a regular 23 ............ for selected employees for whom
places are in great demand. Finally, employees' families are invited to company open days,
when they are allowed to try out the 24 ............ .

    The Margaret Mills Corporation allows employees a great deal of flexibility with their children,
who can be brought to the office once 25 ............ has finished. Mills likes to reward employees
for company performance with a party or even a 26 ............ for families. There is considerable
evidence that these practices are having the desired effect.
