READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading
Passage 2 below.

                 A mechanical friend for children

A The development of robots that interact socially with people and assist them in
     everyday life has been an elusive goal of modern science. Despite impressive
     advances in the mechanical aspects of this problem, producing robots that bond and
     socialize with people for sustained periods of time has proven difficult. The most
     successful robots so far have been storytellers, but they have only been able to
     maintain human interest for a limited time and typically rely on the robot telling stories
     that change over time. In practice, commercially available robots seldom cross the 10-
     hour barrier (i.e., individual users tend to spend less than a combined total of 10 hours
     with the robots before losing interest). This observation is in sharp contrast to the long-
     term interactions and bonding that commonly develop between humans and their pets.

B In a recent study, researchers from the Institute for Neural Computation in California
     introduced a state-of-the-art social robot into a classroom of 18-to-24-month-olds for
     five months as a way of studying human/robot interactions. The researchers, including
     Fumihide Tanaka and Javier R. Movellan, introduced a toddler-sized humanoid robot
     into a classroom at a childhood education center. One of the QRIO series of robots, the
     58 cm machine, was originally developed by Sony. `Children of toddler age were
     chosen because they have no preconceived notions of robots,' according to Tanaka.
     One of the goals of the study was to establish whether it was possible for social robots
     to maintain the interest of children beyond the 10-hour barrier.

C The researchers sent instructions to the robot about every two minutes to do things like
     giggle, dance, sit down, fall down, or walk in a certain direction. The 45 sessions were
     videotaped, and interactions between toddlers and the robot were later analyzed. The
     results showed that the quality of those interactions improved steadily over 27
     sessions. The interactions deteriorated quickly over the next 15 sessions, when the
     robot was ordered to behave in a more limited, predictable manner. Finally, the
     human/robot relations improved in the last three sessions, after the robot had been
     instructed to display its full range of behaviors.

D `Initially, the children treated the robot very differently from the way they treated each
     other,' Tanaka said. `Early in the study, some children cried when QRIO fell. But a
     month into the study, the toddlers helped QRIO stand up by pushing its back or pulling
     its hands.' `The most important aspect of interaction was touch,' Tanaka said. `At first,
     the toddlers would touch the robot on its face, but later on they would touch it only on
     its hands and arms, like they would with other humans. Another robot-like toy named
     Robby, which resembled QRIO but did not move, was used as a control in the study.
     While hugging of QRIO increased, hugging of Robby decreased throughout the study.
     Furthermore, when QRIO laid down on the floor, caretaking behaviors were frequently
     observed toward QRIO but seldom toward Robby.'

E The study concluded that after 45 days of immersion in a childcare center over a period
     of five months, long-term bonding and socialization occurred between toddlers and a
     state-of-the-art social robot. Overall, the interaction between children and the robot
     improved over time and the children progressively treated it more as a peer than a
     plaything. `To my knowledge, this is the first long-term study of this sort,' said Ronald
     Arkin, a roboticist at the Georgia Institute of Technology in the US.

F Tanaka and Movellan are now developing autonomous robots for the toddler
     classroom. `It could have great potential in educational settings, assisting teachers and
     enriching the classroom environment,' Tanaka said. The researchers hope that more
     advanced versions of robots like QRIO could become personalized tutors to assist
     teachers in classrooms. A robotic tutor could react on the spot to social cues and
     approximate social skills like facial expression and eye gaze, they said. `It is becoming
     clear that, to achieve this goal, we are going to endow machines with something similar
     to emotion, not just traditional forms of intelligence,' said Movellan.

G Associate Professor David Powers, an expert in artificial intelligence and cognitive
     science at Flinders University in South Australia, commented, `In this study, it is clearly
     demonstrated that a limited range of robot behaviors, however impressive, is nowhere
     near as important to human/robot interaction as being able to make appropriate
     responses from a broad repertoire of behaviors.' Ronald Arkin was not surprised by the
     affection demonstrated by the toddlers toward the robot. `Humans have a tremendous
     propensity to bond with artifacts, whether it be a car, a doll, or a robot,' he said. But he
     also cautioned that researchers do not yet understand the consequences of increased
     human/robot interaction. `Studying how robots and humans work together can give us
     insight into whether this is a good thing or a bad thing for society,' Arkin said. `We need
     to find out what the consequences are of introducing a robot into a cadre of children.
     How will that enhance, or potentially interfere with, their social development? Do we
     really understand the long-term impact of having a robot as a childhood friend?'
Questions 14-18
Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 14-18 on your answer sheet.
NB You may use any letter more than once.
14 a comparison of children's reactions towards different robots
15 a speculation about ways robots may be able to communicate
16 a description of changes in the way the children physically handled a robot
17 a comparison between people's connections with animals and their connections with

     robots
18 an account of the way one robot was programmed
Questions 19-23
Look at the following statements (Questions 19-23) and the list of people below.
Match each statement with the correct person, A-D.
Write the correct letter, A-D, in boxes 19-23 on your answer sheet.
NB You may use any letter more than once.
19 In future, robots will not only have to think, but also to show feelings.
20 It is uncertain whether more contact between people and robots will be beneficial.
21 Very young children have not yet developed ideas about robots.
22 Robots need to perform a wide variety of actions for people to relate to them.
23 Using robots as an aid in schools may have many benefits.

                                                   List of People
                                             A Fumihide Tanaka
                                             B Javier R. Movellan
                                             C Ronald Arkin
                                             D David Powers

Questions 24-26
Complete the sentences below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet.
24 Until recently, robots that were best at holding people's attention were those that acted

     as ............ .
25 The children responded to the QRIO robot as a friend or a ............ rather than as a

     toy.
26 Arkin expected that the children would show ............ towards the QRIO robot.
