READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading
Passage 2 on the following pages.
Questions 14-20

Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-x, in boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet.

                List of Headings

i               Choosing the best moment to migrate

ii              The physical characteristics of birds that allow them to migrate

iii             Environmental pollution and migration patterns

iv              The main reason why birds migrate

v               Research findings on how birds find their way

vi              Successful migration despite a lack of teaching

vii Why some birds don't migrate

viii How larger birds make use of the wind

ix              Success despite problems with wind during migration

x               The unexplained rejection of closer feeding grounds

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
20 Paragraph G
                          Bird Migration

A Birds are highly mobile and among the swiftest of living creatures. Flight gives them the
     power to move in any direction for as long as they have the energy to keep going. They
     are equipped with lightweight, hollow bones, a finely-tuned navigation system and an
     ingenious heat-conserving design that allows them to face life in the harshest of
     climates. Their respiratory systems have to perform efficiently during sustained flights at
     altitude, so they have evolved a system of extracting air from their lungs that far
     exceeds that of any other animal. These features enable birds to come and go with the
     seasons. On the way, they face constant danger and a daily requirement to find food,
     water and a safe place to rest. So why do millions of birds migrate rather than stay in
     one place?

B Most of the explanation revolves around food. In temperate and arctic regions of the
     northern hemisphere, food is abundant during a short growing season. Migration
     evolved as a way for birds to exploit resources that are seasonally abundant and,
     equally important, to go elsewhere when the resources become scarce or harsh
     weather arrives. Many species can tolerate cold temperatures if food is plentiful but
     when food is not available they must migrate.

C While this simple explanation for why birds migrate is essentially true, intriguing
     questions remain. One puzzling fact is that many birds journey much further than would
     be necessary to find food and good weather. Another apparent conundrum involves the
     huge migrations performed by arctic birds and mudflat-probing shore birds that breed
     close to polar regions. In general, the further north a migrant species breeds, the further
     south it spends the winter. Yet, en route to a final destination in southern latitudes, all
     these individuals overfly areas of seemingly suitable habitat spanning two hemispheres.
     Such compulsive journeys probably evolved over time and in response to fluctuations in
     weather but we do not really know.

D But just how do birds reach their destination and, more to the point, how do young birds
     migrate over vast distances without parental assistance? Very few adults migrate
     accompanied by their offspring and youngsters may have little or no inkling of their
     parents' appearance. Cuckoos are famous for depositing their eggs in the nests of
     other birds that unwittingly serve as foster-parents. Astonishing as this piece of
     evolutionary behaviour is, it is even more remarkable to consider that, once grown, the
     young cuckoo makes its own way to ancestral wintering grounds in the tropics before
     returning single-handedly to northern Europe to seek out a mate among its own kind.
E As we continue to study bird migration, its mystery is better understood but also
     compounded. Mounting evidence has confirmed that birds use the sun and stars to
     obtain compass directions but true navigation requires an awareness of position and
     time, especially when lost. Experiments have shown that, after being taken thousands
     of miles over an unfamiliar landmass, birds are still capable of returning rapidly to nest
     sites. Such phenomenal powers are the product of computing a number of
     sophisticated cues including an innate map of the night sky and the pull of the Earth's
     magnetic field. How the birds use their 'instruments' remains unknown, but one thing is
     clear - they see the world with a sensory perception superior to ours. Most small birds
     migrate at night and take their direction from the position of the setting sun. However,
     as well as seeing the sun go down, they also seem to see the plane of polarised light it
     causes. This calibrates their compass. Travelling at night provides other benefits: the
     danger of meeting predators as well as the risk of dehydration due to flying for long
     periods in warm sunlit skies is reduced. Furthermore, at night the air structure is cool
     and smooth and conducive to sustained, stable flight.

F Nevertheless, all journeys involve considerable risk and part of the skill in arriving
     safely is setting off at the right time. This means accurate weather forecasting and
     utilising favourable winds. Birds are adept at both and, in tests, some can detect the
     minute difference in barometric pressure between the floor and ceiling of a room. Often
     birds react to weather changes before there is any visible sign of them. Certain species
     that feed on grassland flee at the onset of a cold snap because when the ground
     surface freezes the birds could starve. Yet they return ahead of a thaw, their arrival
     linked to a pressure change presaging an improvement in the weather.

G Unfortunately, some never complete their journey. Not so long ago the assumption was
     that a bird in the air on a dark windy night with no visible reference points to judge
     position was, like a pilot without radar, hopelessly lost. We now know this is not the
     case. Losses do occur, but mainly because birds get swept off course by strong air
     masses against which battle is futile, and this results in a watery grave. Indeed, it is not
     unusual for ocean fish to be caught with bird remains in their stomachs. But sometimes
     there's a silver lining. Each autumn a small number of North American birds are blown
     across the Atlantic by fast-moving westerly tail winds. Not only do they arrive safely in
     Europe but, based on tracking evidence, some make it back to North America in the
     following spring - probably after spending the winter with European migrants in sunny
     African climes.
Questions 21 and 22
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Write the correct letters in boxes 21 and 22 on your answer sheet.
According to the passage, which TWO of the following statements are true of migrating
birds?

     A Many birds migrate longer distances than they need to.
     B Family groups migrate most successfully.
     C Birds need less water if they migrate at night.
     D Only shore birds are unaffected by wind.
     E Birds are unable to survive if separated from other members of their own species.

Questions 23-26
Complete the sentences below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 23-26 on your answer sheet.
23 The cuckoo is able to migrate despite a lack of .................. guidance.
24 Night travel benefits birds because they can avoid contact with .................. .
25 Some birds can anticipate weather changes without .................. clues.
26 In the past, birds were thought to be .................. when flying in the dark.
