READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 19
Reading Passage 2 has six paragraphs, A-F.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-ix, in boxes 14-19 on your answer sheet.

                        List of Headings

i               Evidence that man's ancestors had a concept of the future

ii              Research into the relation between brain size and memory

iii             Animals that can remember place and time

iv              Research into various animals' capacity for future planning

v               A memory type described with reference to brain damage

vi              Conflicting experimental results concerning animal

                memory

vii Research evidence of memory loss in various animals

viii Experimental evidence of a relation between past and

                future in human mental processes

ix              Research into ways to improve episodic memory

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
              Do animals really remember?

                      Research into different kinds of memory

A Humans are born time travellers: we can relive events that happened long ago or
       imagine ourselves in the future. Clues about different kinds of memory can be
       discovered from research conducted on people with certain brain injuries that cause
       them to forget autobiographical details without forgetting the information they picked
       up along the way. A man known as KC in the scientific literature, for instance, could
       play chess with no memory of having ever played it before. He could also remember
       sentences psychologists taught him without any memory of the lessons. KC had lost
       what psychologists now call `episodic memory'. Dr Endel Tulving, a Canadian
       psychologist, defined episodic memory as the ability to recall the details of personal
       experiences: what happened, where it happened, when it happened and so on. Dr
       Tulving argued that episodic memory was distinct from other kinds of memory and
       that it was unique to our species.

B But are humans alone in this respect? Dr Nicola Clayton, of Cambridge University,
       has performed experiments which test American birds called western scrub jays to
       see if they met any of the criteria for episodic memory. The jays bury several
       thousand pieces of food a year and remember the location of each one. Dr Clayton
       wondered if scrub jays simply remembered the locations or if they remembered
       details of the experience of hiding the food. She ran an experiment using two kinds of
       food: moth larvae and peanuts. Scrub jays prefer larvae to peanuts if the larvae are
       still fresh. However, if the larvae have been dead for even a few hours, the jays prefer
       peanuts. Dr Clayton gave the birds a chance to hide both kinds of food in a sandy
       hiding area. Dr Clayton noted exactly what the birds had hidden and where, and then
       put the birds in a cage. She later returned the birds to the area where they had
       hidden the food, in some cases after four hours and in other cases after five days.
       The time the scrub jays had spent away from their hiding area affected the type of
       food they looked for. The birds that waited only four hours tended to dig up larvae,
       while the birds that had to wait for five days passed the larvae by and dug up peanuts
       instead. To make sure they were not just smelling the rotten larvae and avoiding
       those spots, Dr Clayton replaced the sand with fresh sand in the hiding area as soon
       as the birds had hidden the food.

C Research with other animals to determine if they are capable of episodic memory has
       had mixed results. When experimental rats are exploring a maze they seem to be
       able to recall which kinds of food they encounter along the way. Observation of
       hummingbirds as they feed appears to show that they remember where and when
       they visited individual flowers for nectar. Tests using Rhesus monkeys have found
       that they can remember where they put food, but not how long ago they put it there.

D True episodic memory, argues Dr Thomas Suddendorf of the University of
       Queensland, involves more than just memory of information. It requires an awareness
       of the self and an ability to use the past to predict the future. He points to the
       discovery of stone tools which primitive humans used for killing animals 2.5 million
       years ago. Scientists assume that primitive humans had to find a way of adding
       much-needed protein to their diet. Paleontologists have determined that some of
       these tools were moved many kilometres from where they were originally made. `If
       you've just eaten, the only reason you're going to take a tool with you is if you
       anticipate using it in the future,' said Dr Suddendorf.

E Recent brain scanning studies provide physiological support for this link between past
       and future. Daniel Schacter, a psychologist at Harvard University, studied how brains
       function as people think about past experiences and imagine future ones. When
       Schacter's subjects constructed episodic memories, distinct networks of their brains
       became active, as recorded by brain scans. When they are asked to think about
       themselves in the future, many parts of the same episodic memory networks become
       active again, suggesting an inter-connection between the processing of the past and
       future.

F Dr Suddendorf's notions have spurred comparative psychologists to look for evidence
       that animals can also think ahead. Some studies suggest not. Cebus monkeys, for
       example, will eat until they are full and throw the rest of the food out of their cage,
       despite the fact that they will not have anything to eat the next morning. But in other
       studies, animals show more promise. `We tested squirrel monkeys to see if they could
       anticipate the future, and to our surprise it looks like they could,' said Dr William
       Roberts, a comparative psychologist at the University of Western Ontario in Canada.
       He and his colleagues ran a test in which they gave squirrel monkeys a choice of
       between one or four dates to eat. Not surprisingly, the monkeys took four. But the
       scientists then began to take away water from the monkeys before they gave them
       the choice. If the monkeys took four, the scientists kept the water away for three
       hours. If the monkeys took one, the scientists returned it in half an hour. The
       monkeys learned to choose one. Though they were not thirsty at the time, they
       seemed to understand that they would become so in future.
Questions 20 and 21

Choose TWO letters, A-E

Write the correct letters in boxes 20 and 21 on your answer sheet

Which TWO of the following statements concerning episodic memory are found in the text?

          A Dr Tulving believes that most kinds of memory involve aspects of episodic
                   memories.

          B The experimental subject KC was unable to recall the process by which
                   he learned to play a particular board game.

          C In the case of KC, the subject's episodic memory was affected by his
                   brain injuries.

          D Dr Tulving carried out extensive observations of the episodic memories of
                   animals as well as humans.

          E To test his episodic memory, KC was given various mathematical
                   problems to solve.

Questions 22 and 23

Choose TWO letters, A-E

Write the correct letters in boxes 22 and 23 on your answer sheet

Which TWO of the following statements are true concerning Dr Clayton's experiments with
scrub jays?

          A The experiments indicated that the birds could remember how long their
                   food had been buried.

          B In the experiments, the scrub jays preferred burying moth larvae to
                   burying peanuts.

          C In the experiments, the birds were guided by the smell of the hidden
                   food.

          D Scrub jays were taught by Dr Clayton to store food for future use.
          E Scrub jays would rather eat certain nuts than decaying moth larvae.
Questions 24 - 26

Complete the summary below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet.

                       What is `true' episodic memory?

Dr Suddendorf believes that `true' episodic memory requires the ability to use the memory for
the future. He cites as evidence ancient 24 ............ which early humans had taken some
distance from where they had been originally fashioned. Dr Suddendorf's theory is supported by
scans showing the activation of certain networks in particular areas of the brain both by episodic
memory and by consideration of the future.

    Do non-human animals also exhibit `true' episodic memory? Cebus monkeys appear to
waste food once they are full, indicating that they do not plan for the future. However, in
experiments, squirrel monkeys chose not to take the extra 25 ............ they were offered as food,
in anticipation of wanting 26 ............ soon afterwards.
