READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 19
Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-F.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 14-19 on your answer sheet.

                List of Headings

i               Official recognition of the importance of natural flood protection

ii              Understanding the positive side of flooding

iii             The consequences of man-made climate change on flooding

iv              The economic implications of flooding

v               Nature's rapid powers of recovery

vi              Bureaucratic obstacles to natural flood controls

vii             Science leads the way in flood prevention

viii The only natural defence against flood damage

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
                    Flood control in the USA

A Americans have always feared floods, and with good reason. Floods are the most
       common and costly of the large natural disturbances affecting the United States.
       Approximately 9 of every 10 presidential disaster declarations are associated with them
       and, after total insurance losses from a series of devastating floods between 1990 and
       1997 reached nearly $34 billion, government policy changed. The USA has
       subsequently spent even more than that trying to control floods by building structures
       such as levees and dams to modify the ways rivers flow.

B However, although we are well aware of the damage floods do, we have not, until
       recently, fully appreciated the many beneficial aspects of flooding. Floods are critical for
       maintaining and restoring many of the important services provided to humans by
       ecosystems. Among other things, regular flooding ensures high levels of diversity in the
       riverine environment by providing a critical habitat for fish, waterfowl, animals, insects,
       and plants. Floodwaters also replenish agricultural land with key nutrients vital to crop
       production, and transport the sediment that is necessary to maintain downstream delta
       and coastal land and prevent erosion. As our knowledge of floods has deepened, it has
       become apparent that floods present us with a paradox. On the one hand, we want to
       prevent them, because they threaten our lives and ways of life. On the other hand, we
       find ourselves searching for ways to allow or even reintroduce flooding, because it
       supports the biological infrastructure that makes valued aspects of our lives possible.

C The focus of policy began to change dramatically in the wake of massive flooding in the
       upper Mississippi and lower Missouri river basins from June to August of 1993. Many of
       the flood defenses failed during this episode. In response, the President ordered a
       special committee to investigate causes, explore how human actions might have
       exacerbated the situation, and determine what the nation should do to prevent a repeat
       event. Known as the Galloway Report, the committee's findings and recommendations
       marked the first time that the crucial ecological protections provided by wetlands and
       upland forests were explicitly acknowledged. This included their ability to store water,
       slow its entry into the river system, and absorb excess nutrients. The committee pointed
       out that losing these protections through changes in land use significantly increases
       runoff from farmland with serious consequences for water quality. Above all, the report
       acknowledged that floods are recurring phenomena that must be accepted and
       anticipated.

D A common theme in the findings from analyzing a range of flood episodes is the
       importance of connections between riverine ecosystems, their floodplains, and the
       broader landscapes through which they flow. It is worth noting that efforts to prevent
       rivers from reclaiming their floodplains rarely pay off in the long run. On the contrary,
       most of the flood costs over the past decade have been associated with damage to
       structures in those floodplains. We have also learned that building on floodplains harms
       wetlands by reducing their ability to hold water and retain nitrogen, phosphorus, and
       other contaminants. Floodplains are the sole safeguard the environment has against
       these and other harmful effects of floods. The aftermath of flooding caused by storm
       Alberto in Georgia in 1994 highlighted the important role they play in minimizing
       destruction. When floodwaters eroded agricultural fields, picking up soil particles
       contaminated with herbicides, pesticides, and fungicides, the large, forested floodplains
       in the area filtered out those particles. They never entered rivers to cause harm.

E Fortunately, although the mechanics of re-establishing floodplains are daunting, it is not
       impossible; their ecosystems are resilient, as studies on recurrent floods in the lower
       Missouri River have shown. Annual spring floods have long been controlled in this
       portion of the river, which stretches from Sioux City, Iowa, to St. Louis, Missouri. As a
       result, it was almost totally disconnected from its floodplain and, by 1990, state or
       federal agencies had classified 16 fish species, 7 plant species, 6 insect species, 2
       mussel species, 4 reptile species, 14 bird species, and 3 mammal species within the
       floodplain complex as endangered, threatened, or rare. But the situation began to
       change with the great Midwest floods of 1993, 1995, and 1996. Post-flood studies have
       demonstrated that plants, zooplankton, aquatic insects, fish, turtles, and other animals
       immediately exploited the reconnection with the floodplain.

F Ensuring that the necessary changes in the landscape are actually made requires a
       good deal of thought, however. In particular, the fragmentation and lack of coordination
       that has characterized policy concerning floodplains in the United States must be
       addressed. Decisions on developments such as construction that could affect
       floodplains are made primarily at county and municipal levels, yet the current policy
       structure gives the federal government the most responsibility for floodplain
       management. It provides little incentive and few mechanisms for the county and
       municipal governments to help. Nor do individual states have much opportunity to
       become involved, even though they may be best situated to coordinate the diverse
       actions and decisions that are needed. In the end, all such policy decisions and the
       accompanying management actions must be based on people weighing up the costs
       and benefits of different spending priorities. In other words, they are political. Scientists
       alone will not, and should not, select which options are appropriate. Rather, their
       contribution will be to spell out the implications and the trade-offs of different policy
       options and management scenarios.
Questions 20 - 24

Complete the sentences below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 20-24 on your answer sheet.

20 The costs of flood prevention measures in the USA have exceeded all ............ payments due
      to flooding during much of the 1990s.

21 Flooding encourages a healthy degree of ............ among the various types of wildlife found in
      and around rivers.

22 Flooding replaces ............ in the soil, which are important for arable farming.

23 Land around river mouths and nearby coasts is protected from erosion by the ............ carried
      in floodwater.

24 Missouri's flood ............ were unable to cope with the huge floods of the early 1990s.

Questions 25 and 26

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Write the correct letters in boxes 25 and 26 on your answer sheet.

Which TWO opinions on US floodplain management policy are expressed in the text?

          A Decision making is currently too concentrated at national level.
          B Local authorities must bear responsibility for past episodes of flooding.
          C Those responsible need to make choices about the allocation of financial

                   resources.
          D Expert advice should be the deciding factor in any decisions.
          E Disagreements over land use are the main area of controversy.
