 READING PASSAGE 2

  You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
  below.

                       Growing food in cities

 An overview of a book that looks at the future of urban food systems -
                 the ways food is provided for residents of cities

A Some consider that cities are at the forefront of future food solutions. There is an
         overall consensus that a lot of urban challenges can be addressed through policies
         linked to urban systems of food provisioning. Considering cities are increasingly
         stepping into the foreground as important actors in the advancement of resilient urban
         food systems (UFS), it is urgent that the many solutions being advanced throughout
         the world are shared. This is exactly what the book Cities and Agriculture, edited by
         Henk de Zeeuw and Pay Drechsel, accomplishes. The book is a collection of studies,
         written by a range of European academics. According to their areas of speciality, these
         contributors address different aspects of global food security and the role that cities
         have to play in achieving this, Global food security was defined in 1996 by the World
         Food Summit as "when all people at all times have access to sufficient, safe, nutritious
         food to maintain a healthy and active life'.

B As the populations of many cities expand, cities are grappling with a number of
         complex challenges, In the opening chapter of this book, Han Wiskerke notes that the
         most pressing challenges include governance and infrastructure; resource use;
         growing inequalities between rich and poor, environmental pollution; climate change;
         and most importantly, the continuing provision of food to urban centres. Wiskerke
         argues that by focusing on food provisioning, many of the other challenges can also
         number of complex challenges, In the opening chapter of this book, Han Wiskerke
         notes that the most pressing challenges include governance and infrastructure;
         resource use; growing inequalities between rich and poor, environmental pollution;
         climate change; and most importantly, the continuing provision of food to urban
         centres. Wiskerke argues that by focusing on food provisioning, many of the other
         challenges can also be addressed.

C The book highlights four key conditions that impact directly on UFS. The first condition
         involves population growth, urbanization, and changing diets. All of these put pressure
         on food security in terms of the affordability, adequacy, and availability of food
         resources, especially for the urban poor. In chapter five, Paule Moustier and Henk
         Renting show, through examples from Africa, Asia, and Latin America, where urban
         agriculture has always been a feature of many of their cities, that due to the proximity
         of the producer to the buyers, urban agriculture gives buyers direct access to
         information about quality, and delivers lower prices and fresher products.
D Scarcity and depletion of resources are put forward as the second condition shaping
         UFS. The provision of food relies heavily on resources, such as fossil fuels, water, and
         land, However, as growing urban populations also produce more urban waste, there
         are ample opportunities for cities to extract resources from human and animal waste,
         and by doing so reduce cities' demands on primary resources. In chapter seven,
         Drechsel explores opportunities for the safe use of organic waste, as well as waste
         water, in urban agriculture, He emphasizes that there are a number of challenges
         related to health risks in the valorization" of waste water streams. However, he notes
         that, especially in cases of water scarcity, techniques to treat waste water are
         promising.

E Thirdly, climate change has substantially impacted agricultural production worldwide as
         well as living conditions, especially in cities, in terms of access to fresh and varied
         food. According to Shuaib Lwasa and Marielle Dubbeling (chapter eight), when it
         comes to the adaptation to climate change, urban agriculture has the potential to
         contribute to the diversification of the food available and offer a source of income for
         urban dwellers. They add that agricultural areas within cities can also help to reduce
         the heat island effect (the term used to describe the fact that cities are significantly
         warmer than surrounding rural areas) and the impact of natural disasters such as
         flooding.

F Finally, public health and diet-related ill health correlate directly with urban food supply
         as obesity and malnutrition are increasingly issues with which cities are coping. This is
         very much connected to urbanization and changing diets, as a transition is taking place
         from a rural to an urban diet based more on animal proteins and processed foods.
         Maria Gerster-Bentaya argues in chapter six that food security for the urban poor is
         tightly tied to their livelihood, considering the majority of them must buy their food but
         often don't have sufficient income to buy all they need. Although certain health risks
         are connected to food produced in cities from toxins accumulating in urban produce
         through contaminated soil, to food safety concerns with street food - urban agriculture,
         nonetheless, improves access to food for the urban poor. Arguably, this also makes a
         more resilient urban food system, as consumers are less dependent upon international
         prices.

G The book also offers detailed insights into different forms of urban agriculture, Urban
         animal farming is addressed and it is shown that it is a much-practiced form of urban
         agriculture in some less developed countries or regions as it is a good source of
         revenue and has the added bonus of shortening temperature-controlled sections in the
         supply chain that are needed for fresh products, Urban agro-forestry is dealt with and
         the argument made that there is a requirement to assess both the challenges and
         possible benefits that agro-forestry can provide in terms of ecosystem services,
         Overall, Cities and Agriculture offers a very comprehensive overview of urban
         agriculture, The information is relevant to researchers and policy-makers, and
         illustrates how these different groups can contribute to more resilient UFS.
Questions 14 - 18
Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 14-18 on your answer sheet.
14 some benefits of raising animals for food as part of urban food systems
15 details of how recycling can reduce agricultural dependence on natural resources
16 recognition that people in cities tend to eat less healthily than people in country areas
17 some locations around the world where urban food production has a long history
18 a comment on how shifts in global weather patterns have affected the range and quality

      of food available to city dwellers

Questions 19 - 21
Complete the summary below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answer in boxes 19-21 on your answer sheet.

   Can cities be at the forefront of future urban food solutions?

Some consider that cities are at the forefront of future food solutions. There are numerous
challenges in urban areas and the general 19 ............ is that many of these could be dealt
with by creating food supply policies. The book Cities and Agriculture aims to present
solutions to improve urban food systems, and the book successfully accomplishes this task. It
brings together 20 ............ from European academics. The topic is covered from a variety of
perspectives by the 21 ............ to the book in relation to their areas of expertise.
Questions 22 - 26
Look at the following statements (Questions 22-26) and the list of researchers below.
Match each statement with the correct researcher, A-E.
Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 22-26 on your answer sheet.
22 A shortage of a resource might be solved by recycling in the future.
23 Growing food in cities is one way of lessening the raised temperature there.
24 Ensuring that the supply of food to cities is maintained will resolve a lot of other issues.
25 The ability of poor city residents to have a reliable supply of food is linked to how much

      money they earn.
26 Food is cheaper in cities with established urban agriculture.

                                               List of Researchers
                                 A Han Wiskerke
                                 B Paule Moustier and Henk Renting
                                 C Pay Drechsel
                                 D Shuaib Lwasa and Marielle Dubbeling
                                 E Maria Gerster-Bentaya
