READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
on pages 6 and 7.

                    GOING WITH THE FLOW?

Environmentalists are arguing over how to cure Florida Bay's ecological problems

A Pouring water into the sea sounds harmless enough. But in Florida Bay, a large and
       shallow section of the Gulf of Mexico that lies between the Everglades and the string of
       islands offshore called the Florida Keys, it is proving highly controversial. That is because
       researchers are divided over whether it will help or hinder the plants and animals that live
       in the bay. In the 1950s, large canals were cut in the Everglades marshland to reclaim
       the land and now there are problems to be solved.

B What is at risk is the future of the bay's extensive beds of sea grasses. These grow on
       the bay's muddy floor and act as nurseries for the larvae of shrimps, lobsters and fish -
       many of them important sport and commercial fishing species. Also in danger is an
       impressive range of coral reefs that run the length of the Florida Keys and form the third-
       largest barrier reef in the world. Since the 1980s, coral cover has dropped by 40%, and a
       third of the coral species have gone. This has had a damaging effect on the animals that
       depend on the reef, such as crabs, turtles and nearly 600 species of fish.

C What is causing such ecological change is a matter of much debate. And the answer is of
       no small consequence. This is because the American government is planning to devote
       $8 billion over the next 30 years to revitalizing the Everglades. Seasonal freshwater flows
       into the Everglades are to be restored in order to improve the region's health. But they
       will then run off into the bay.

D Joseph Zieman, a marine ecologist at the University of Virginia, thinks this is a good idea.
       He believes that a lack of freshwater in the bay is its main problem. The blame, he says,
       lies with a century of drainage in the Everglades aimed at turning the marshes into
       farmland and areas for development. This has caused the flow of freshwater into Florida
       Bay to dwindle, making the water in the bay, overall, more saline. This, he argues, kills
       the sea grasses, and as these rot, nutrients are released that feed the microscopic plants
       and animals that live in the water. This, he says, is why the bay's once crystal-clear
       waters often resemble a pea soup. And in a vicious circle, these turbid blooms block out
       sunlight, causing more sea grasses to die and producing yet more turbidity.

E Brian Lapointe, a marine scientist at the Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution,
       disagrees. He thinks sea grasses can tolerate much higher levels of salinity than the bay
       actually displays. Furthermore, he notes that when freshwater flows through the
       Everglades were increased experimentally in the 1990s, it led to massive plankton
       blooms. Freshwater running off from well-fertilized farmlands, he says, caused a five-fold
       rise in nitrogen levels in the bay. This was like pouring fuel on a fire. The result was mass
       mortality of sea grasses because of increased turbidity from the plankton. Dr. Lapointe
      adds that, because corals thrive only in waters where nutrient levels are low, restoring
      freshwater rich in nitrogen will do more damage to the reef.

F It is a plausible theory. The water flowing off crops that are grown on the 750,000 acres
      of heavily fertilized farmland on the northern edge of the Everglades is rich in nitrogen,
      half of which ends up in the bay. But Bill Kruczynski, of America's Environmental
      Protection Agency, is convinced that nitrogen from farmlands is not the chief problem.
      Some coral reefs well away from any nitrogen pollution are dying and, curiously, a few
      thriving. Dr. Kruczynski thinks that increased nutrients arriving from local sewage
      discharges from the thousands of cesspits along the Florida Keys are part of the problem.

G Such claims and counterclaims make the impact of the restoration plan difficult to predict.
      If salinity is the main problem, the bay's ecology will benefit from the Everglades
      restoration project. If, however, nitrogen is the problem, increasing the flow of freshwater
      could make matters much worse.

H If this second hypothesis proves correct, the cure is to remove nitrogen from farmland or
      sewage discharges, or perhaps both. Neither will be easy. Man-made wetlands, at
      present being built to reduce phosphate run-off into the bay - also from fertilizers - would
      need an algal culture (a sort of contained algal bloom) added to them to deal with
      discharges from farmlands. That would be costly. So too would be the replacement of
      cesspits with proper sewerage - one estimate puts the cost at $650 million. Either way, it
      is clear that designating 3,000 square miles of sea around the reef as a 'protective zone'
      will do nothing to protect the reef from pollution.

I Some argue, though, that there is a more fundamental flaw in the plans for the bay: the
      very idea of returning it to a utopian ideal before man wrought his damage. Nobody
      knows what Florida Bay was exactly like before the 1950s, when engineers cut the
      largest canals in the Everglades and took most of the water away, changing the flow into
      the bay with the results we see today. Dr. Kruczynski suspects it was more like an
      estuary. The bay that many people wish to re-create could have been nothing more than
      a changing phase in the bay's history.

J These arguments do not merely threaten to create ecological problems but economic
      ones as well. The economy of the Florida Keys depends on tourism - the local tourist
      industry has an annual turnover of $2.5 billion. People come for fishing-boat trips, for
      manatee watching, or for scuba diving and snorkeling to view the exotically coloured
      corals. If the plan to restore the Everglades makes problems in the bay and the reef
      worse, it could prove a very expensive mistake.
Questions 14 - 17
Reading Passage 2 has ten paragraphs, A-J.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-J, in boxes 14-17 on your answer sheet.
14 a number of expensive proposals to reduce the excess of nitrogen
15 a proposal for financial support for environmental action
16 an expression of doubt about the original appearance of the bay
17 statistical information on the damage to sea life

Questions 18 - 21
Look at the following causes of pollution (Questions 18-21) and the list of people below.
Match each cause of pollution with the correct person, A, B, or C.
Write the correct letter, A, B, or C, in boxes 18-21 on your answer sheet.
18 the run-off of human waste from the local towns
19 the increased saltiness of the water
20 the high levels of nitrogen from the surrounding agricultural land
21 the reclamation of the marshland for agricultural use and building

                                                        List of People
                                                   A Joseph Zieman
                                                   B Brian Lapointe
                                                   C Bill Kruczynski
Questions 22 - 26

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 2?

In boxes 22-26 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE               if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE              if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN          if there is no information on this

22 There is agreement on what the effects of increasing water flow into Florida Bay will be.

23 The effects of nitrogen in the bay depend on the type of crops grown in the Everglades.

24 One possible solution is an environmentally friendly treatment of the pollution caused by
      fertilizers.

25 Scientists can demonstrate what the area was like before the canals were made in the
      1950s.

26 Holiday-makers are important to the economy of the area.
