READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 19

Reading Passage 2 has six sections, A-F.

Choose the correct heading for each section from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 14-19 on your answer sheet.

              List of Headings

i             Sending messages underground

ii Potential advantages for farmers

iii The widespread rejection of an idea

iv One species accelerating growth in another

v Some obstacles to plant communication

vi Evidence leading to renewed belief in a theory

vii New technologies which helped researchers

viii A suggested benefit to the sender of plant communication

14 Section A
15 Section B
16 Section C
17 Section D
18 Section E
19 Section F
          How do plants talk to each other?

Research shows that plants communicate and interact with each other
                 in surprisingly subtle and sophisticated ways.

A In 1983, plant scientists Jack Schultz and Ian Baldwin reported that healthy young
      maple trees increased their defense systems when exposed to maples that had
      been damaged by plant-eating (herbivorous) insects. The injured trees, they
      suggested, were alerting neighbors to the presence of a predator by releasing
      chemical signals into the air. But the plant research community did not accept this.
      The results were difficult to replicate, critics pointed out. Many also questioned
      how a trait could be evolutionarily stable if it benefited neighboring plants but not
      the plant releasing the signal. By the late 1980s, most ecologists felt that Schultz
      and Baldwin's ideas had been discredited.

B A decade later, however, a number of more carefully designed experiments began
      to yield convincing indications to the contrary. In 2000, evolutionary ecologist
      Richard Karban showed that wild tobacco plants became resistant to herbivores
      when grown in close proximity to sagebrush plants whose leaves had been
      damaged by cutting. This change appeared to be in response to chemicals --
      known as volatile organic compounds or VOCs -- released by the sagebrush
      plants. Other researchers soon reported similar VOC-induced defense responses
      in several other plants, including lima bean, broad bean, barley, and corn. And in
      2006, Karban showed that VOCs released by damaged sagebrush induce
      herbivore resistance in plants growing at distances of up to 60 cm, well within the
      range of sagebrush neighbors in nature.

C But the question still remains: 'Why should a plant waste valuable resources on a
      function which has no obvious advantage for it?' One hypothesis is that external
      communication channels are merely an extension of within-plant signaling. In
      sagebrush, lima bean, and poplar, VOCs released from damaged parts of a plant
      induce resistance in intact sections of the same plant, suggesting that each
      individual plant uses the signals to coordinate its own physiological responses to
      protect itself. Karban agrees, saying, 'The interplant signaling we see may be a
      result of plants co-opting that process.' Alternatively, VOC-based signaling
      between plants may have been favored because it enhances the 'extended fitness'
      of the sender by aiding related plants of the same species: a strategy known as
      kin selection.

D Over the past few years, a team led by Ariel Novoplansky of Ben-Gurion
      University of the Negev in Israel seems to have found proof that distress signals
      can be passed through the plants' roots. They planted garden pea plants in rows
      and subjected the first in each row to conditions similar to those experienced in a
      drought. They then evaluated the response by measuring the microscopic holes
      on leaves, known as pores, which react when there is a shortage of water. After
      fifteen minutes, the stressed plant was seen to be closing its pores, followed by all
      of its neighbors, one by one. Importantly, in a control setup where root contact
      between neighboring plants was blocked, pores stayed open. Meanwhile, David
      Johnson's team at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland have been studying the
      labyrinths of hair-like fungi that occur around the roots of most plants. These fungi
      are involved in an important two-way relationship: in exchange for sugars, they
      provide plants with much-needed phosphorus and nitrogen. Research in which
      broad bean plants were infested with aphids -- small herbivorous insects --
      revealed that these networks also served as a channel for warning neighboring
      plants of the infestation.

E Monica Gagliano of the University of Western Australia believes that plants may
      even use sounds to alert their neighbors. In one study, she demonstrated that chili
      plants planted next to fennel plants developed more quickly than seedlings grown
      with other chili plants. Gagliano and her colleagues suspect the chili plants were
      compensating for the presence of the fennel, which is known to release chemicals
      that inhibit the growth of other plants. Remarkably, however, all known plant
      communication pathways -- airborne volatiles, root contact, and common fungal
      networks -- were blocked. The results begged for an alternative explanation. 'We
      think this other channel of communication might be acoustic,' says Gagliano. But
      behavioral ecologist Carel ten Cate of the University of Leiden in the Netherlands
      points out that taking advantage of such benefits would require sensory
      mechanisms yet to be described in plants. Despite widespread skepticism,
      Gagliano has received some encouragement. Richard Karban, for example, is
      cautiously enthusiastic. 'Whether or not the explanation she favors is the right
      one,' he says, 'I think that she's gotten results that, as a field, we need to come to
      grips with.'

F Researchers believe that knowledge of this phenomenon could eventually be
      applied to agriculture, and lead to the cultivation of hardier crops. All agree that
      there is still much work to be done. 'Applying our limited knowledge [of plant-
      communication mechanisms] to agriculture is a big jump,' says Johnson, 'but it is
      definitely on the horizon.' Nevertheless, one message has emerged loud and clear
      from those studying this new realm of botanical interaction: despite not possessing
      eyes, ears, or a nervous system, plants are anything but uncommunicative. 'When
      I did my PhD [in the late 1980s], all this stuff was considered very weird,' recalls
      Ariel Novoplansky. 'Today, there's no doubt. We now recognise that plants are
      capable of some very sophisticated exchanges of information with other plants.
      This idea is not strange anymore.'
Questions 20 - 23

Complete the summary below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answer in boxes 20-23 on your answer sheet.

          Plant communication research in Israel and Scotland

Plants may send messages via their 20 ............ according to Ariel Novoplansky of Ben-Gurion
University in Israel. In one study, Novoplansky's team planted rows of garden peas, and created
conditions like a 21 ............ around the first plant in each row. The plants responded by closing
the tiny holes on their leaf surfaces, known as pores. They then appeared to signal to other
plants nearby, causing them to respond in a similar way.

         Research at the University of Aberdeen in Scotland, meanwhile, has focused on the
networks of 22 ............ which connect the plants beneath the soil. These structures, which
extract sugars from the plants and supply them with phosphorus and nitrogen, also seem to play
a key role in plant communication. Experiments involving broad bean plants and plant-eating
insects called 23 ............ have also produced some interesting results.
Questions 24 - 26

Look at the following statements (Questions 24-26) and the list of researchers below.

Match each statement with the correct researcher, A-E.

Write the correct letter, A-E, in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet.

24 It is likely that research into plant communication will one day help to improve our food
      supply.

25 Plant communication could occur as a consequence of internal mechanisms intended to
      help a single plant.

26 Attitudes towards plant communication have changed greatly in recent decades.

                                                    List of Researchers

                                                    A Richard Karban
                                                    B Ariel Novoplansky
                                                    C David Johnson
                                                    D Monica Gagliano
                                                    E Carel ten Cate
