READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 19
Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-F.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 14-19 on your answer sheet.

                                List of Headings

i               The effects of a new environmentally friendly building on the people

                who work there

ii              The ability of well-designed workplaces to attract the best staff

iii             The assessment of workplaces in several locations

iv              The low priority given to making buildings healthy for users

v               Achieving design efficiency by involving a range of specialists

vi              Workers were assessed outside of their usual workplace

vii             Workplace changes based on worker feedback

viii The financial benefits of efficient workplaces

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
            Healthy buildings, productive people

        Indoor building can influence our thinking, behavior and health

A Have you felt tired at your desk lately? According to new research, some often
       overlooked environmental factors within buildings - the degree or type of ventilation,
       airborne contaminants, lighting and noise levels, for example - can play a surprisingly
       large role in how good or bad you feel, and even how well you think. It is estimated that
       we spend more than 90 percent of our time inside, but builders in general have paid little
       attention to the health aspects of indoor spaces, instead focusing on superficial design
       features and on meeting minimum environmental standards to keep costs down.

B Researchers at Harvard University in the US looked at the effects of indoor air quality on
       workers' cognitive performance - important both for health and for companies' bottom
       lines, says Joseph Allen, assistant professor of environmental health and principal
       investigator of the studies. `The true cost of running our buildings should take into
       account the health and productivity of people in those buildings,' Allen says. In fact, an
       analysis by the team showed that the cost of making alterations that could boost
       cognitive performance significantly was minuscule compared with the related increase in
       productivity - about $40 per person, per year, compared with a $6,500 increase in
       employee productivity.

C The team's first study, published in Environmental Health Perspectives, was conducted
       at the Syracuse Center of Excellence, a US research organization devoted to studying
       and developing sustainability. The center houses a laboratory that allows researchers to
       test a wide range of indoor air quality factors using sophisticated ventilation. Each day,
       the indoor environment was controlled with a ventilation system which included small
       amounts of carbon dioxide and volatile organic compounds, or VOCs - the toxic by-
       products of office supplies commonly found in the workplace. The office workers were
       blinded to the conditions. For six days over two weeks, 24 office workers with
       administrative, technical, professional or managerial jobs came to the lab and performed
       their regular work under minimal supervision, as well as participating in an hour and a
       half of cognitive testing at the end of the day. The cognitive tasks used in the study had
       participants respond to online scenarios that mimic real-life situations, such as running a
       city as a mayor. The findings are remarkable for showing in a well-controlled study, that
       indoor air quality can significantly lower cognitive performance in buildings that would
       otherwise meet current building standards, notes environmental psychologist Craig
       Zimring, director of Georgia Tech University's SimTigrate Design Lab in the US. `If these
       findings are replicated in other labs and in real-world work environments,' he says, `they
       could lead to designs that provide much more outside air through mechanical ventilation
       or operable windows, for example' - in turn, promoting better health and performance.

D In a second study, reported in Building and Environment, the Harvard-Syracuse team
       moved from the lab to the real world. Using the same methodology, they compared test
       scores of 109 people working in 10 buildings - about 12 people per site - in two
       buildings in each of five cities. When the team examined the buildings for differences,
       they found that certified buildings had lower humidity levels and brighter light than the
       non-certified buildings. That said, the differences in humidity and lighting didn't entirely
       explain the differing cognitive function scores of people on the job. This has led
       researchers to believe that other factors, such as how someone feels about their
       working environment, may also play a part, notes Harvard research fellow Piers
       MacNaughton, who led the study.

E A recently constructed building on the Washington University campus in St. Louis, US, is
       providing another opportunity to examine how green building design can affect health
       and behavior. Hillman Hall was designed with the highest environmental and energy
       standards available, as well as design elements intended to foster more collaboration
       and physical activity, says Amy Eyler, associate professor and assistant dean for public
       health at the Brown School at Washington University. The design includes easy access
       to stairways, plenty of natural light, generous spaces for collaboration, desks that allow
       people to sit or stand up, and inviting places to walk. Unlike traditional hallways
       designed as long corridors with private offices to either side, for example, these hallways
       include classrooms, offices and spaces to sit, so they are multi-use - `you have many
       reasons to walk them,' says Eyler. To test how the building might affect people's
       behavior, Eyler conducted a pre-test before people moved in, and a post-test one year
       later. Her team collected data on the three main features the designers were attempting
       to foster: physical activity, collaboration and sustainable practices. Results showed that
       people were more likely to take part in spontaneous collaborations in the new space
       than in the older ones, and to be physically active.

F Like other researchers in this growing field, Eyler sees multidisciplinary collaboration as
       the key to success. Administrators, public health faculty and architects worked together
       to create a building that captured the university's vision for a space that fosters collegial
       work and health for faculty, staff and students - a shared goal evidenced by the fact that
       the architecture firm that designed the building also funded part of the research.
       `Complex projects like this one need teams of people with varied backgrounds and
       expertise in order to solve them,' Eyler says.
Questions 20 - 23
Look at the following statements (Questions 20-23) and the list of researchers below.
Match each statement with the correct researcher, A, B, C, or D.
Write the correct letter, A, B, C, or D, in boxes 20-23 on your answer sheet.
NB You may use any letter more than once.
20 Further investigations will result in improved wellbeing and efficiency.
21 A person's opinion of their workspace may influence how well they perform at work.
22 The design of a workplace can have an impact on how much staff work with their

      colleagues.
23 A worker's mental capacity may be considerably reduced due to their working

      environment.

                                               List of Researchers
                                            A Joseph Allen
                                            B Craig Zimring
                                            C Piers MacNaughton
                                            D Amy Eyler

Questions 24 - 26
Complete the summary below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answer in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet.

       Harvard study published in Environmental Health Perspectives

Allen's first study was done at the Syracuse Center, which focuses on researching 24 ............ .
In this study, a complex ventilation system was used to control the airflow in the simulated
workplace. All staff carried out normal duties during the day without much 25 ............ . Later in
the day participants were assessed as they performed tasks which required them to play a role,
for example acting as 26 ............ while dealing with practical problems.
