READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 20

Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-x, in boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet.

                List of Headings

i  Assumptions about language and nutrition

ii A series of developments involving bone structure

iii Conflicting theories about Homo ergaster's ancestry

iv The earliest occurrence of a human-like species

v The beginnings of human migration

vi Evidence of conflict between populations

vii Physical features adapted for climate

viii The social behaviour linked to human reproductive features

ix Technical advances in the analysis of human remains

x The valuable discovery of a specimen

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
20 Paragraph G
                        Homo ergaster

A A huge debate rages about human origins, but the broad consensus among
    scientists is that all the different species of human (hominids) that have ever
    existed were descended from ape-like creatures that walked upright in Africa more
    than six million years ago. These creatures had many descendants, most of which
    became extinct, but the first creature we would recognise as human first appeared
    in Africa almost two million years ago. Homo ergaster, meaning 'working human',
    evolved during an accelerated period of global cooling and drying that cleared
    more and more tropical rainforest from Africa, and created desert in the northern
    half of the continent.

B One of the best sources of information about Homo ergaster is a skeleton found in
    1984 by Alan Walker and Kamoya Kimeu at Nariokotome in West Turkana, Kenya.
    The remains turned out to be those of a young boy, who was between the ages of
    11 and 13 when he died. Around 1.5 million years ago, the boy's body sank into
    the marsh where he died, and became fossilised. His teeth show signs of a
    sizeable abscess where his milk teeth fell out, indicating that he may have died
    from blood poisoning.

C This hominid was probably the first to regulate its temperature through sweating.
    For creatures that must remain active at midday in a sunny, dry habitat, sweating
    is the most effective mechanism for maintaining safe body and brain temperatures.
    Homo ergaster's body was probably smooth and largely hairless, since heat loss
    through sweating occurs most efficiently through naked skin. Its skin was almost
    certainly dark, to protect it from the sun's harmful rays.

D Homo ergaster travelled long distances on foot, as it worked hard to scavenge
    enough meat to feed its body and brain. In order to increase the energy efficiency
    of muscles involved in upright walking, Homo ergaster developed a narrower
    pelvis. But its slim hips came at a price. Firstly, the narrowing of the pelvis caused
    the lower part of the rib cage to narrow. In order to prevent constriction of the
    lungs, the upper part of Homo ergaster's rib cage expanded, giving its chest a
    human barrel shape. Secondly, and more importantly, the narrowing of the pelvis
    constricted the female birth canal. This single anatomical change seems to have
    had profound consequences for human society.

E As brains increased in size, mothers had to push increasingly big-brained infants
    through an already tight pelvis, and that caused problems. The eventual solution
    was a trade-off. While chimpanzees are born with their brains almost fully mature,
    humans are born with a comparatively immature brain. This makes human babies
    helpless and vulnerable during their first year of life as their brains make vital
    neural connections. As a result, human mothers need to be well nourished to keep
    up with the demands of their babies, making them increasingly reliant on the
    support of their male partner and other members of their group. Many experts
    regard this shift as the beginning of the family with its distinctively human pattern
    of sharing and cooperation between males and females.

F Nariokotome Boy had a thick, bony ridge across his eyes. A pair of front teeth
    stuck out at an angle from a large, projecting mouth below a long, wide nose. His
    anatomy does not seem developed enough to have given him the control over his
    breathing needed for complex speech, so Homo ergaster probably communicated
    using hand movements, supplemented by a limited range of sounds. The other
    relatively small teeth of Nariokotome Boy suggest that Homo ergaster relied more
    than his ancestors on stone tools for cutting up meat before eating. To begin with,
    Homo ergaster used primitive implements, which were little more than chipped
    rocks with sharp edges. But by around 1.6 million years ago, Homo ergaster
    developed symmetrical, heart-shaped handaxes, which gave the hominid greater
    control over the butchering of meat.

G Shortly after Homo ergaster appeared 1.9 million years ago, humans began to
    leave Africa for the first time and move to other continents. Archaeological records
    show they spread over an area ranging from Turkey into Asia, although the
    population may not have been very large. This newfound desire to travel may have
    been dictated by an increasing reliance on meat for food. Carnivores generally
    need much larger home ranges than similar-sized herbivores, because carnivores
    have fewer total calories, in the form of animal prey, available to them per unit area
    of their territory.
Questions 21 and 22

Choose TWO letters, A-E

Write the correct letters in boxes 21 and 22 on your answer sheet

Which TWO physical features did adult Homo ergaster have?

A  two protruding teeth

B  wide hips

C  a small brain

D  short limbs

E  a wide upper rib cage

Questions 23 - 26
Complete the sentences below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 23-26 on your answer sheet.
23 Evidence of a large ............ in Nariokotome Boy's jaw indicates a possible cause of

      death.

24 Nariokotome Boy's body shape was similar to that of the present-day ............ people.

25 Unlike earlier hominids, Homo ergaster was probably able to keep cool by ............ .

26 Early humans adapted to their narrow pelvis by giving birth to infants whose brain was still
      ............ .

.
