READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.

                  Introduction to a book about
            the assessment of carbon footprints

A As this book is about ways of measuring the carbon footprint of particular things, I
       should start by making it clear what I mean. I am using the word 'carbon' as shorthand
       for all the different global-warming greenhouse gases, and I am using the word 'footprint'
       as a metaphor for the total impact that something has. So I am using the phrase 'carbon
       footprint' as shorthand to mean the full climate-change impact of something. That
       something could be anything -- an activity, an item, a lifestyle, a company, a country, or
       even the whole world.

B Measuring carbon footprints is a long way from being an exact process, whatever
       anyone claims, or whatever numbers you might see written on the side of products in
       some shops. All my numbers are best estimates and nothing more, even though I have
       reached them as carefully as I can.

C I have used a variety of different methods and sources. I have drawn on a range of data
       sets and models taken from publicly available reports of life-cycle* studies. I have also
       used studies carried out for businesses across different industries by my own company,
       Small World Consulting, using models that we are developing all the time. Often I have
       arrived at numbers by a couple of different routes, to check that the results agree with
       each other. Occasionally, it has been more a case of putting my finger in the air and
       guessing, but when that has been the case I have tried to make it clear.

D The publicly available data sets I have used were arrived at by two main methods. The
       first of these, process-based life-cycle analysis, is the most common approach to carbon
       footprint calculations. It is often referred to as 'bottom-up' because you start off
       identifying, one by one, all the processes that have had to happen in order for, say, a
       product to be created. Then you add up the emissions from each process, and that is
       the footprint of the product. It may sound simple, but it is not at all. It is back-breaking
       work, and since the number of processes you really need to include is always infinite,
       the job is never quite complete, so you end up with an underestimate. In fact, the
       omissions from the calculation are often shocking: they can be fifty per cent or more. To
       make matters worse, these problems are commonly overlooked, even in the
       development of government-backed and government-funded guidelines, such as the
       UK's PAS 2050 standard. But for all the problems, process-based life-cycle analysis is
       still an essential source of detailed information that can't be gathered any other way.

E The other method is environmental input-output analysis. This is a neat alternative to
       process-based life-cycle analysis. It is not as popular, perhaps because it is a bit less
       easy to understand, but it is at least as robust as anything else in the dim world of

* life-cycle: the stages of a product's life from beginning to end (i.e. from raw material extraction through materials
processing, manufacture, distribution, use, repair and maintenance, and disposal or recycling).
       measuring carbon footprints. It is sometimes called a 'top-down' approach because it
       begins by looking at the whole economy. It uses macroeconomic modelling to
       understand the way in which the activities of one industry trigger activities and emissions
       in every other industry. Input-output analysis' key 'trick' is a piece of ingenious maths (for
       which a man called Wassily Leontief got a Nobel Prize) that succeeds in capturing the
       endless ripple effects in a way that is one hundred per cent complete. It has the further
       advantage that if you know how much something costs, you can get an instant crude
       estimate of its carbon footprint. It is like a magic trick. And just like all the best magic it is
       also a bit too good to be true -- in many cases the results can be ridiculously general
       and of little value.

F Input-output analysis is nevertheless a powerful tool both because it does not omit
       things, and because once a specific model has been built it is often easy to use. The
       basic technique is well established. The specific model I have used is one that was
       developed at Small World Consulting in collaboration with Lancaster University in the
       UK, and draws mainly on data obtained from government sources. It was based on a
       2007 picture of the UK economy. It deals with all the greenhouse gases, and employs a
       weighting factor for gases emitted at a high altitude, which have a greater impact than
       ground-level emissions. A key weakness, which I sometimes adjust for, is that it treats
       imported products as though they had the same carbon intensity as products from within
       the UK, whereas in reality imports are usually more carbon-intensive.

G Most of the time I have used a combination of life-cycle analysis and input-output
       analysis to get my numbers. At its best, life-cycle analysis can be more precise, but
       input-output analysis is often able to get at information that life-cycle analysis is unable
       to reach. Putting the two methods together is sometimes called a hybrid approach, and
       the result is a bit like looking through both a microscope and a telescope at the same
       time. They each show you different things, and between them, if the lenses are clean,
       you end up with a passable understanding of whatever it is you are looking at.
Questions 14 - 19
Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 14-19 on your answer sheet.
14 reference to an award-winning formula
15 an acknowledgement of the general shortcomings of carbon footprint calculations
16 mention of a working partnership
17 reference to the demanding nature of one way of calculating carbon footprints
18 the advantage of combining two different methods
19 a comparison between goods from home and abroad

Questions 20 and 21
Choose TWO letters, A-E
Write the correct letters in boxes 20 and 21 on your answer sheet
Which TWO of these features of process-based life-cycle analysis are mentioned by the writer?

          A It is more complicated than it sounds.
          B It usually produces exaggerated results.
          C It is a frequently used procedure.
          D Its faults are widely recognised.
          E It was first developed in the UK.
Questions 22 and 23

Choose TWO letters, A-E

Write the correct letters in boxes 22 and 23 on your answer sheet

Which TWO of these features of environmental input-output analysis are mentioned by the
writer?

          A It is often the basis of national guidelines.
          B Its starting point is the manufacturing process.
          C It is comprehensive in scope.
          D It is a relatively new method of calculation.
          E It can use prices to get approximate carbon footprints.

Questions 24 - 26

Complete the summary below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answer in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet.

                               Small World Consulting

Small World Consulting has collaborated with a UK University to develop a version of the
environmental input-output model of analysis, using data provided by the 24 ............ about the
UK economy in 2007. This model is able to take into account the altitude at which greenhouse
gases are produced. A significant 25 ............ is that it does not distinguish between
26 ............ of different origin, but the writer occasionally makes allowances for that.
