READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading
Passage 2 on the following pages.
Questions 14-20

Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet.

                List of Headings

i    A character who provoked sympathy and amusement

ii   Outdoor performances with a standard set of characters

iii  Pantomime as a means of focusing on political issues

iv   Discovering pantomime at a young age

v    A way of dealing with a negative attitude toward pantomime

vi   An explanation of how a pantomime character appeals to modern audiences

vii Debate about the origins of pantomime

viii A successful merging of artistic sources

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
20 Paragraph G
                                Pantomime

A A pantomime performance is a unique blend of eccentricity and absurdity, a wild
     mixture of songs, jokes, outrageous costumes and slapstick physical humour. For many
     British children, their first family trip to see a pantomime in the Christmas holiday
     season is their introduction to the magic of the theatre. But what has become a
     quintessentially British form of entertainment is more than just simple fun. As an art
     form, pantomime presents a tale of good and evil, where hope finally triumphs after
     danger and virtual despair.

B The story of pantomime begins with the commedia dell'arte tradition in 16th-century
     Italy. These improvised shows took place in streets and marketplaces in Italy and
     eventually throughout Europe. Distinctive masks enabled audiences to recognise the
     people in these stories immediately; they also allowed actors to be rude or disrespectful
     without fear of being recognised. The key roles in the cast were invariably rich old men,
     usually portrayed as cowardly and disreputable; young lovers whose parents refuse to
     let them marry; and ingenious and quick-witted servants. Many commedia plots show
     the latter, whose lives are a constant struggle to find food and money, outwitting the old
     men or overthrowing their masters. This theme of the victory of the underdog is still an
     essential feature of pantomime today.

C By the mid-18th century, many thousands of people were going to theatres across
     Britain every night. Among the most popular performances were harlequinades, a new
     kind of entertainment which interwove Ovid's first-century Latin poem Metamorphoses
     with aspects of the Italian commedia. Created by actor John Rich, these early
     pantomimes cleverly mixed spectacle, music, ballet and myth, and were tremendously
     enjoyable to watch. Amazing transformations happened at the touch of a magic wand,
     with mechanical serpents and flying vehicles. They also showed that even early
     pantomime was fascinated by the crossing of boundaries: the ambiguity of men
     dressed as women, and the fun of animal characters played by human beings.

D Despite their popularity, Rich's spectacular performances attracted huge controversy.
     Critics bitterly attacked pantomimes, complaining that they would bring about the
     downfall of Shakespeare and the death of serious theatre. David Garrick, the great
     18th-century actor-manager, was quick to join these criticisms, while also realising the
     commercial opportunities of this new art form. But how could Garrick take advantage of
     the craze and still maintain his position as the defender of `legitimate' theatre? His tactic
     was to set about changing pantomime's cultural identity, partly by confining shows to
     his theatre's Christmas season. Pantomimes became associated with the frivolity of the
     holiday season rather than being denounced as a threat. In doing so, Garrick created a
     convention which has survived to this day.
E At the end of the 18th century, popular theatre saw the arrival of the white-faced Clown,
     in the form of actor Joseph Grimaldi. By the early 19th century, Britain was at war with
     France; there was intense civil unrest and violent confrontations between the
     government and the people. Grimaldi's hilarious antics embodied the freedom and
     liberty of British culture by contrast with the country's supposedly dull, humourless
     enemies. His anarchic activities included chasing and imprisoning policemen and
     stealing gigantic quantities of sausages. But the Clown was never caught or sent to jail.
     Audiences were thrilled by his mischief and his endless eating precisely because he
     created on stage the fantasy of a different world: a world without hunger, a world of
     comic revenge against a highly repressive government. Grimaldi became one of the
     great satirists of his age, a character who offered ludicrous commentaries on everything
     from the ruling classes to fashion, technology and new forms of transport.

F By the late 19th century, photography had arrived, the telegraph had been invented and
     the first motor cars were starting to appear on British streets. Meanwhile, the spotlight
     on the comic stage shifted away from the Clown and towards an unexpected star, the
     pantomime `Dame': a tired housewife - always played by a man - struggling to cope in
     an unfriendly world. Dan Leno was the celebrated performer who created and played
     this talkative and eccentric working-class woman, a mother facing the difficulties of
     poverty, which he and his audiences knew all too well. In the Dame, Leno developed a
     persona whose theatrical power comes from the locking together of compassion and
     laughter. At the same time, artists such as Leno began to infuse pantomime with the
     plots and dilemmas of working people's culture.

G Pantomimes are as popular today as they have ever been. Our delight in this form
     comes from a complex mixture of emotions and relationships. Pantomime offers us the
     anarchic excitements of a topsy-turvy world only to give us the assurance of harmony
     restored. The engaging character of the Dame exemplifies pantomime's self-
     proclaimed absurdity. Her comical conversations with the audience cut across the
     boundaries between performers and spectators, drawing us into her chaotic world.
     While she presides over the anarchy which Grimaldi once visited on policemen, the
     Dame also embodies the collective ties which bind us together as families, as
     neighbours, and as members of society.
Questions 21-23
Complete the sentences below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 21-23 on your answer sheet.
21 Commedia dell'arte actors used _______ to disguise their real identities.
22 Harlequinades combined elements of a 16th-century art form with a _______ written

     many centuries earlier.
23 In early 19th-century pantomimes, _______ were often victims of the Clown's activities.

Questions 24-26
Look at the following statements (Questions 24-26) and the list of people below.
Match each statement with the correct person, A, B, C or D.
Write the correct letter, A, B, C or D, in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet.
24 His performances focused on the situation of the less wealthy sections of society.
25 He introduced elements of the supernatural to the pantomime genre.
26 His pantomime character was never seen to be punished for his on-stage crimes.

                                                   List of People
                                               A John Rich
                                               B David Garrick
                                               C Joseph Grimaldi
                                               D Dan Leno
