READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 19

Reading Passage 2 has six sections, A-F.

Choose the correct heading for each section from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 14-19 on your answer sheet.

              List of Headings

i  Interpreting the research behind who is participating in art activities

ii How sales of artwork have increased in many countries

iii Two opportunities for getting kids involved in art activities

iv How art can be made accessible to the public

v Developing a model to explain the lack of participation in art

vi The connection between art and media

vii How involvement with art affects well-being and attitudes

viii How art makes communities safer and more vital

14 Section A
15 Section B
16 Section C
17 Section D
18 Section E
19 Section F
          Public Art Programs: Research Update

    Researchers agree that art participation is an important leisure pursuit, with
benefits not only to the individual, but also to the community. Art participation can
be active, where people create or perform the art, or passive, as is the case when

              an audience views a performance or a person visits a gallery.

 A Researcher Howard Spector suggests that active art experiences benefit all age groups by
       providing individuals with the means to freely and creatively express themselves. Self-
       expression, in turn, promotes individuality, bolsters self-confidence and improves
       motivation and attitudes towards academic performance. Both active and passive art
       experiences can provide the benefits of discovery, stimulation and relaxation (Oliphant
       2000). Furthermore, people's participation in art enhances their development and expands
       their thoughts about culture. In short, art can make individuals more socially conscious.

 B Communities committed to providing opportunities for experiencing art are considered
       more livable because they are attractive to businesses and industry and they offer a higher
       quality of life for residents (Riley 2002). Tourism is strongly linked to art--art activities are
       believed to stimulate tourism in a community, and vice versa. Art-related tourism generates
       tourists and revenue, attracts high-income consumers, extends the tourist season and is a
       'green' form of the industry (Hughes 2000). Revitalization efforts have increased in many
       cities because of the strong presence of art opportunities. Art programs can be highly
       effective in reducing community problems related to delinquent behavior and truancy in
       youth (Spector 2000). The Philadelphia Department of Recreation, Mural Arts Program
       (MAP) is one such program. It began in the early 1980s when the city undertook to remove
       graffiti in the city while creating a positive, productive and creative outlet for adjudicated
       graffiti artists, as they used their talents to beautify public spaces through the creation of
       murals, instilling a sense of pride, excellence, diligence and civic responsibility.

 C In recognition of these and other benefits, communities are finding many ways to ensure
       that the public is provided with opportunities to experience art. Public art programs are one
       way. These programs are typically administered by government, which commissions or
       mandates works of art for display in public spaces. Public art works can include street
       furniture, decorations, paving and landmarks, and may take on many forms, including
       sculpture, decorative ironwork, mosaic flooring and murals. The primary purpose of public
       art is to bring art into everyday life, to energize public spaces and to arouse society's
       thinking and imagination.

 D Despite the significant benefits that art participation can offer to individuals and
       communities, only 35 percent of the American adult population visit museums or galleries
       at least once during the year, and only about 25 percent attend a live performance
       (Bradshaw 1998). Even fewer (14 percent) participate directly in photography, painting,
       drawing, sculpting, dance (other than ballet), creative writing or classical music. If art
       experiences are so beneficial, why aren't more people participating?

       To help researchers shed light on this question, the RAND Corporation, a nonprofit
       institution that helps improve policy and decision-making through objective research and
       analysis, developed 'A Behavior Model of the Participant Decision', which can be used to
      investigate people's inclinations about participating in an art activity (Yoshitomi 2000).
      According to Yoshitomi, each person has a disposition related to his or her interest in
      engaging in an art activity; a person's disposition is based on sociodemographic
      characteristics, social or cultural identity, personality and previous experience. The RAND
      model clusters participants into three groups according to their disposition toward art
      participation: those disinclined to participate; those inclined to participate; and those
      currently participating.

E The RAND findings reveal that the disinclined perceive themselves as being uncomfortable
      or unfamiliar with art. This disposition might occur among people who do not value art and
      who have not received art education, or who perceive themselves as unsophisticated or
      lacking skill to participate. The inclined are interested in participating, but may be
      constrained by particular barriers, such as cost, time, and proper attire. Current participants
      are those who are involved, and influence or encourage others to participate.

      Researchers suggest that a strong relationship exists between childhood and adult art
      participation rates. Individuals with a greater number of childhood art experiences are more
      likely to have higher rates of participation as adults. Although 90 percent of Americans
      believe art instruction is important for children and should be offered in schools, almost 40
      percent of schools either offer no art instruction or have art instructors with no formal art
      training.

F One recreation organization working to make sure children get exposed to art is the Boys
      and Girls Clubs of America, which offer two innovative programs: The National
      Photography Program and the National Fine Arts Exhibit. Both are designed to get children
      excited about art. The photography program promotes new art that is technologically
      produced, including video and computer graphics, but primarily focuses on photography.
      The program provides club members with the opportunity to achieve personal growth and
      receive artistic recognition through instruction in photography. Participants also display
      their work at local, regional and national photography contests. The second program is the
      Fine Arts Exhibit. This encourages artistic expression, creativity, cultural appreciation and
      the development of artistic skills through classes, special events, exhibits and
      competitions. It allows participants to explore a variety of mediums, including drawing,
      painting, print making, collage and sculpture.

      Because art experiences provide so many important benefits to individuals and
      communities, it is important for community programs to facilitate opportunities and provide
      encouragement to increase participation in a variety of programs.
Questions 20 - 23
Look at the following statements (Questions 20-23) and the list of researchers below.
Match each statement with the correct researcher, A-F.
Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 20-23 on your answer sheet.
20 The energy people have for exercising willpower is limited.

21 Even an unpleasant substance had a positive effect on willpower.
22 People's responses to images changed after having to exercise self-control.

23 The sequence of options presented to consumers could be used to the consumers'
      disadvantage.

                                                  List of Researchers
                                                  A Spector
                                                  B Oliphant
                                                  C Riley
                                                  D Hughes
                                                  E Bradshaw
                                                  F Yoshitomi

Questions 24 - 26
Complete the sentences below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet.
24 Sometimes people want to get involved in art activities but can't afford it, can't fit it into

      their schedule, or don't have the suitable ............ .

25 A noticeable correlation exists between art involvement ............ in childhood and those in
      adulthood.

26 The National Photography Program allows members to grow personally and also gain
      ............ for their artistic achievements.
