READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading
Passage 2 below.

     The gender gap in New Zealand's high school examination results

  Results from New Zealand's new national examinations for secondary schools are giving
                                    that country some cause for concern.

A The issue is the difference in pass rates between the sexes: at each level of the
     examination and across all school types, the difference is about 10 percentage points.
     Girls are doing better in every subject, and those in girls-only schools are taking top
     honours. The results are not a surprise: high school girls have been outperforming boys
     academically for more than a decade. It is an international phenomenon, and within
     Australia was the subject of much debate and controversy. Within New Zealand back in
     the 1980s, there was a concerted campaign, called `Girls Can Do Anything', which was
     aimed at lifting girls' participation rates, achievement levels and aspirations. This was
     so successful that the pendulum has now swung to the other extreme. Views differ on
     how worried people should be. After all, for much of history, girls were excluded from
     any form of education, and this new phenomenon could be seen as a temporary over-
     correction before the balance is righted.

B However the New Zealand State Ministry of Education says it is taking the issue
     seriously. It is working with a reference group on boys' education which has been set
     up, and it has commissioned an Australian academic to report on interventions that
     have been found to work for boys, drawing particularly on Australia's experience. But
     some, such as former prison manager Celia Lashlie, the author of a book for parents of
     teenage boys, believe there is still resistance within the Education Ministry towards
     doing anything about the problem.

C Education Ministry learning policy manager Steve Benson says that the `National
     Certificate in Educational Achievement', or NCEA, as New Zealand's high school
     exams are called, is useful to employers and to universities because it provides a fine-
     grained picture of pupils' performance in every aspect of a subject, rather than just a
     pass or fail in an overall area. `In most parts of the curriculum, for example in maths,
     there isn't really a gender gap. But literacy is a different matter. Even boys who are
     good at writing tend not to write so much. There's actually a quantity issue.'
D The discrepancy in reading and writing skills between males and females shows up as
     early as preschool, and the difference is clear by the time these children enter high
     school. Not being good at literacy was not such a problem in the old days when many
     students left school for manual jobs after Year 11. But nowadays many more stay on to
     higher education, and almost all jobs require literacy skills. Roger Moses, the
     headmaster of Wellington College, says that the written content of NCEA papers is
     more demanding than the previous system of secondary school qualifications in New
     Zealand, even in subjects such as statistics and accounting.

E New Zealand 15-year-olds do very well in international reading tests, but beneath this
     average lies a wide variance, with New Zealand European girls most represented at the
     top and New Zealand Pacific Island boys at the bottom. Yet some European girls drop
     out, and some Pacific Island boys excel. In other words, the range in performance
     within each gender group is much greater than the gender differences. Ethnic
     differences, and differences in socio-economic status, may be more significant than the
     simple boy/girl explanation.

F This makes the Education Ministry nervous about pushing solutions that emphasise
     stereotyped gender differences, rather than looking at underachievement as a whole.
     Rob Burroughs, principal of Linwood High School in Christchurch, agrees. For three
     years his school ran separate boys' classes to try to address the disparity in
     performance, before abandoning them. The research showed that the boys did better in
     their own class than in the co-educational environment. But when he looked at which
     teachers they had, and how well those teachers' other classes did, it became clear that
     the difference was, instead, to do with the quality of instruction.

G At Onslow College, Dr Stuart Martin would do away with the NCEA Level 1 exam if he
     could. He says that in Year 11, aged 15, boys are simply not mature enough to cope.
     `They tend to think that just passing is enough, and that it's not necessary to work hard
     for a Merit or an Excellence grade. Often they are busy with other activities and part-
     time jobs. Boys' competitive instinct tends to come out later in their schooling years,
     especially if there is money attached or other tangible rewards. By 17, boys are
     catching up academically with the girls, and by the end of Year 13, boys are again
     winning the top prizes.'

H Boys in single-sex schools do better in NCEA across all levels, something economist
     Brian Easton reported after analysing data from the first year of NCEA's
     implementation. He said the results were valid, even when socio-economic status was
     taken into account. Dr Paul Baker, head of Waitaki Boys' High School in Oamaru,
     agrees. He thinks that although it is possible for all schools to do more to boost boys'
     performance, it is easier in a boys' school, where activities cannot be `captured by girls'.
Questions 14-16
Complete the summary below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 14-16 on your answer sheet.

                       High school assessment in New Zealand

New Zealanders are worried at the outcomes of their high school assessment system,
because the 14 ________ of girls are higher than those of boys by 10%. A gender gap has
been apparent for over a 15 ________. This situation is not unique to New Zealand, and
has been noticed in 16 ________ also.

Questions 17-20
Reading Passage 2 has eight paragraphs, A-H.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 17-20 on your answer sheet.
17 an advantage of New Zealand's secondary school tests
18 a mention of current government initiatives to boost male achievement
19 when gender difference in literacy skills first becomes evident
20 findings that relate academic achievement to race
Questions 21-26
Look at the following people (Questions 21-26) and the list of statements below.
Match each person with the correct statement, A-H.
Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 21-26 on your answer sheet.
21 Celia Lashlie
22 Steve Benson
23 Roger Moses
24 Rob Burroughs
25 Stuart Martin
26 Paul Baker

                                                List of Statements
       A Boys gain lower marks on NCEA if they attend an all-boys' school.
       B Boys are disadvantaged by girls tending to take over at school.
       C Good teaching is more important than whether classrooms are single-sex or

            mixed.
       D Mathematical skills were not so important in the past.
       E The difference in achievement between schoolboys and girls is only evident in

            some subjects.
       F Older boys are more motivated to study than younger boys.
       G The NCEA exams have higher literacy standards than past exams did.
       H The New Zealand government is reluctant to take action on behalf of boys.
