READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 20
Reading Passage 2 has seven sections, A-G.
Choose the correct heading for each section from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-x, in boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet.

              List of Headings

i  Packaging that allows consumers to use more of the product

ii The many reasons for changes in packaging

iii Packaging that includes utensils like spoons and forks

iv Packaging that can be consumed with its contents

v Packaging that doesn't take up a lot of space

vi The history of food packaging

vii Packaging that indicates when food is beginning to go rotten

viii Packaging that can be reused

ix Using packaging to communicate ideas and attract customers

x Packaging that vanishes or decomposes quickly

14 Section A
15 Section B
16 Section C
17 Section D
18 Section E
19 Section F
20 Section G
                The Future of Food Packaging

A Food companies spend a lot of time thinking about packaging as a way to represent their
      brand and make consumers love their products. More than cosmetic details like labels or
      logos, a food's container can suggest playfulness, environmental consciousness or high
      technology. Packaging provides consumers' first and last impressions of a product.

B Fortunately for consumers, advances in food packaging technology promise to make food
      storage and preparation simpler. Consumers are growing ever more obsessed with sleek
      technology, reducing food waste, and minimizing health risks to themselves and the
      environment, and in response, food packaging is undergoing some interesting
      developments. Food-packaging designers are hard at work to make groceries
      environmentally friendly, compact, and functional.

C Edible packaging has been proposed as one solution to consumers' environmental
      concerns because it leaves no waste. The fried chicken chain KFC, for example, is
      experimenting with an edible coffee-cup. Made from a hard cookie lined with heat-
      resistant white chocolate, the cup is KFC's attempt to reduce its landfill waste and satisfy
      customers who are concerned that businesses produce products that support food-
      system sustainability and innovation. Another company, Stonyfield Organic, introduced
      frozen yogurt 'pearls' using edible food wrappers. The skin has no flavor and can be
      rinsed and eaten with the yogurt (much like a grape), eliminating the need for plastic
      spoons or wrappers for those on the go. It seems that people still want a layer of sanitary
      protection, though, because the spherical yogurts are still sold in containers.

      Similarly, a company called Loliware has sold gelatin-based edible drinking cups for two
      years, in flavors like Madagascar vanilla and tart cherry. And last year, the company
      introduced edible cupcake wrappers made from potato starch. Even with these new
      advances, one decade-old edible invention continues to see great success - the clear
      paper used to wrap Japanese Botan Rice Candy.

D Another development has been nonstick packaging, which can eliminate the 3 to 15
      percent of sauces left inside traditional bottles, like those last trails of ketchup and
      mayonnaise that won't come out no matter how hard you shake or squeeze. Liquiglide -
      which refers to both a company and the product it makes - is a permanently wet slippery
      surface that allows viscous matter to slide off easily. Liquiglide estimates that its coating
      could prevent 1 million tons of food waste each year. The coating is made from
      components approved by the US government, and, according to the company, does not
      affect the taste or smell of food. Another benefit of Liquiglide is that it prevents
      carbonated beverages from going flat.

E New safety-enhancing packaging is now addressing the issue of food spoilage. It might
      seem this was solved long ago with the advent of the 'Sell-By' date stamp, which was
      meant to warn customers of when the food would no longer be considered suitable for
      consumption. But after a Harvard report revealed that sell-by dates are often inaccurate
      because of variances in transportation and grocery store policies, and that they also
      contribute to America's food-waste problem, the stamps have lost credibility in the food
      industry. In response, scientists are working on food packaging like plastic wrap that is
      'active and intelligent' with tiny embedded sensors to first detect and later prevent food
      from spoiling. This advancement in food packaging draws upon nanotechnology, which is
      dedicated to making electronic sensors tiny and inexpensive. Of course, one could also
      rely on what has saved humankind from food poisoning for millennia - the senses. If it
      smells bad, throw it away.

F Another emerging technology is packaging that disappears. MonoSol, LLC creates food-
      grade water-soluble bags for pre-portioned oatmeal or rice. When boiled, the bag
      dissolves, leaving only the food, ready to eat. Monosol, LLC is marketing this to
      professional kitchens as well as consumers, as a way to pre-measure meal ingredients
      and ensure consistency regardless of who is cooking. Tomorrow Machine, a Swedish
      design firm, has plans for three disappearing packages: an oil bottle made from hardened
      sugar that cracks open like an egg; a fruit juice container made from seaweed that 'will
      wither at the same rate as its content'; and a peelable beeswax package for rice or other
      dry goods.

G Super-compressed packaging serves the increasing number of city dwellers who
      generally have tiny kitchens and no storage room. Additionally, many people living in
      urban areas walk home from grocery stores, and they need lighter and smaller packages.
      Tomorrow Machine is also working on a compressed tiny package that expands into a
      full-size bowl when hot water is added.
Questions 21 - 23
Look at the following companies (Questions 21-23) and the list of packaging developments
below.
Match each company with the correct packaging development, A-F.
Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 21-23 on your answer sheet.
21 KFC
22 Loliware
23 Tomorrow Machine

                                        List of Packaging Developments
                      A a container that gets bigger under certain conditions
                      B packaging that vanishes in hot water
                      C a material that prevents the waste of sticky condiments
                      D packaging made from a vegetable product
                      E a sweet container for hot drinks
                      F round, flavourless containers that can be eaten

Questions 24 - 26
Complete the sentences below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 24-26 on your answer sheet.
24 In Japan, ............ has been used as edible packaging for years.
25 Liquiglide reduces food waste, especially in bottles containing various ............ .
26 Tomorrow Machine is planning to use solid ............ as container for oil.
