READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 20
Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-viii, in boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet.

                List of Headings

i  The impact of musical performance on the etiquette of applause

ii The negative effects of applause on a kind of public performer

iii The initial emergence of applause as a behavior in the theatre

iv A form of applause that is more permanent than ever before

v The use of applause by political figures to value their own popularity

vi How music can influence an audience's level of applause

vii The different methods of applause employed in ancient times, besides clapping

viii The re-emergence and disappearance of fake appreciation

ix How the theatrical world copied the world of politics in giving applause

x The use of applause in working out how popular an opponent was

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
20 Paragraph G
     The origin and development of applause

  Whether you clap, cheer or whistle a great public performance, you
                            are following a long tradition

A Scholars aren't quite sure about the origins of applause, but the form that is still
      most common, clapping the hands together, was formalized in Western culture
      during and after performances. During the time of the Roman Republic (509 BC -
      27 BC) the common way to end a play was for the chief actor to yell 'Valete et
      plaudite!' ('Goodbye and applause!') thus signaling to the audience it was time for
      them to give praise by striking hands and making explosive noise. It is no surprise,
      then, that this became a means of crowd manipulation. Rome saw the rise of a
      professional class of plaudiceni, or 'people who clapped for their dinner', hired to
      infiltrate crowds and manipulate their reaction to performances. Actors would hire
      a dozen or so people to spread out among their audiences and prolong the
      applause, or, if they were feeling especially bold, to start 'spontaneous' chants and
      shouts of praise.

B The Roman Republic came to an end and was replaced by the Roman Empire (27
      BC - 476 AD) where applause became a way for leaders to interact directly with
      their citizens. One of the chief methods they used to estimate their standing with
      the people was gauging the greetings they got when they entered the arena.
      Leaders became astute at reading the volume, the rhythm, and the length of the
      crowd's claps for clues about how well they were doing as officials and lawmakers.
      'We should think of it as an ancient type of opinion poll,' says Greg Aldrete, a
      professor of history. 'This is how you gauge the people.' Roman leaders were
      gathering data about people by listening to applause.

C Clever leaders of the ancient world researched their rivals, too. Cicero, the Roman
      lawyer, would send friends to stand around outside the arena, taking notes to see
      what kind of greeting each official got when he entered, the better to see who was
      beloved by the people, and who was not. They had a lot of information to assess.
      'Ancient crowds were more interactive than they are today,' Aldrete points out.
      'There was a lot of back and forth between speakers and crowds. And particularly
      in the Greco-Roman world, crowds, especially in cities, were really good at
      communicating messages through rhythmic clapping, sometimes coupled with
      shouts.' The coding was, he says, invaluable when assessing an official's fortunes.

D Around the first centuries AD, those systems of applause became more and more
      elaborate. Applause no longer meant, simply, 'claps'. While Greco-Roman
      audiences certainly smacked their palms together the same way we do today,
      their overall strategies of applause were much more varied than clapping alone.
      Crowds expressed degrees of approval of the person or persons before them,
      ranging from claps, to snaps (of the finger and thumb), to waves (of the edge of
      the toga). The emperor Aurelian decided to replace this gesture by waving a
      special handkerchief instead, a prop which he then distributed to all Roman
      citizens, so they would never be without a way to praise him.

E Although style of applause may have changed over the centuries, the need to
      manipulate remained. 16th-century French poet Jean Daurat is credited with
      bringing back the Roman practice of hiring professional applauders. In France, this
      group became known as a 'claque'. Daurat handed out tickets to his own
      performances to people who promised to applaud at the end. By the early 1820s,
      claques had become institutionalized, with an agency in Paris specializing in the
      distribution of the claqueurs' services. The historian William B. Cohen describes
      the intricate price lists agencies of this kind would hand out to potential patrons:
      polite clapping would cost this many francs, enthusiastic applause would cost this
      many. The claque also underwent a kind of classification: the rieurs (laughers)
      would laugh loudly at the jokes; the pleureurs (criers) would feign tears in reaction
      to performance; the commissaires (officers) would learn a play or a piece of music
      by heart and then call attention to its best points. The practice spread to Milan, to
      Vienna, and to London before falling out of use. The claque lost its power once
      people became aware of its tricks.

F And clapping itself evolved. In the 18th century, symphonies and concerts became
      more serious, aligning themselves with the reverence and spirituality associated
      with religious ceremonies. Knowing when to maintain silence, as well as when to
      clap, became a mark of sophistication, a kind of code for audiences to learn.
      Applause became a matter of 'do' or 'don't,' so losing many old shades of
      meaning. Those changes changed performers, too. Applause became much less
      of a true dialogue with an audience, especially so with opera, where the singers
      saw it as part of a basic transaction with the crowd. So by the time the 19th
      century arrived, applause had become standardized and institutionalized, and had
      become an expectation rather than the reward it used to be.

G In the 21st century we're reinventing applause, to make it what it used to be: a
      coded form of communication. More and more the digital world allows us to link
      and like and share through our devices. By connecting with others in this way, we
      become part of the performance by participating in it, demonstrating our
      appreciation by amplifying and extending the show through commenting and
      praising. But our kind of applause matters more now, in many ways, because it is
      no longer momentary and short-lived, but is far more permanent instead.
Questions 21 and 22

Choose TWO letters, A-E

Write the correct letters in boxes 21 and 22 on your answer sheet

Which TWO of the following statements are true of the 'claque' in France?

          A As a practice in France, it first appeared in the 16th century.
          B It did not become a widespread practice within France.
          C The cost of hire depended on the fame of the client.
          D Claqueurs were divided into different categories.
          E The practice did not extend beyond France to other countries.

Questions 23 - 26

Complete the sentences below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 23-26 on your answer sheet.

23 In the 18th century, people could show their superiority by understanding when either
      ............ or applause was appropriate

24 Performers in the 18th century, in particular those working in the ............ , no longer had
      a meaningful dialogue with their audiences.

25 In the 19th century, applause was no longer offered as a ............ to performers.

26 Nowadays our expressions of approval are seen as ............ in comparison to the
      applause of the past.
