READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading
Passage 2 on the following pages.
Questions 14-20

Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-ix, in boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet.

                     List of Headings

                i    Early research into athletes' physiology

                ii   A convenient method of acclimatization

                iii  The need for a rational approach

                iv   Changes in the body

                v    The athletes who break the rules

                vi   Well-founded concerns

                vii The surprising outcome of a race

                viii The reversal of a decision

                ix   The runners who dominate

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
20 Paragraph G
             What is an unfair advantage in sport?

   Olympic athletes increasingly depend on technology to help them win - but is that fair?

A What happened to the Australian athlete Ron Clarke in the 10,000 metres at the Mexico
     City Olympics of 1968 is now virtually forgotten, though at the time it was headline
     news. Clarke was the greatest distance runner in history; he'd broken more world
     records than anybody else. But in front of 55,000 horrified spectators, the event went
     disastrously wrong. In the third lap, one runner keeled over and, with six laps to go, two
     more were carried away. Yet the race was being conducted at a relatively leisurely
     speed: the halfway time was the slowest since the Paris Olympics of 1924. With two
     laps to go, Clarke was in the leading pack. `I'd never felt better in a race,' he says. But
     suddenly he too began to struggle, and as the frontrunners moved up a gear, a gap
     opened up. Clarke remembers nothing of his last lap, which he ran in 90 seconds.
     `Normally I would run it in 64,' he explains. He stumbled across the line in sixth place
     and collapsed. He was administered oxygen and stretchered off the track.

B Mexico City is surrounded by mountains and is over 2,240 metres above sea level.
     That the altitude would have an impact on the Games was predicted. Clarke had raised
     the issue himself, but had been told by the Australian sports authorities that
     complaining was regarded as bad sportsmanship. As it turned out, he had good reason
     to do so. Clearly, the link between athletic performance and altitude needed further
     investigation.

C Although there were few standout performances in distance running at the Mexico
     Games, they marked a turning point: the start of an astonishing record of success by
     East Africans. While Clarke lay crumpled in a heap, runners from Kenya and Ethiopia
     were celebrating their gold and silver medals. The record books confirm how
     entrenched this pattern has become. The names of the seven fastest men in history
     over 5,000 metres are Bekele, Gebrselassie, Komen, Kipchoge, Sihine, Songkok and
     Chereno. They are all from either Kenya or Ethiopia. Between 1997 and 2011 the
     10,000 metres world record was smashed five times, dropping from 26:31.32 to
     26:17.53. Each time, the record was broken by a Kenyan or an Ethiopian. While there
     is a complex mix of economic, political, social and cultural explanations for the pre-
     eminence of East Africans, one factor is surely that many of these athletes have lived
     most of their lives in thin air.

D At high altitudes, a number of physiological alterations occur, most importantly, more
     red blood cells and haemoglobin are produced. This, in turn, increases the capacity of
     the blood to carry oxygen, which feeds the muscles and which gives an advantage to
     the athletes when they return to sea level. However, it is impossible to train with the
     same level of intensity in the mountains--aerobic capacity and cardio-respiratory
     function both suffer at altitude. As a result, the consensus is that the optimum approach
     to athletic preparation is: Live High, Train Low (LHTL). Yet that has obvious practical
     drawbacks. Not many people live in the mountains and those who do would prefer not
     to spend several hours each day driving up and down winding treacherous roads.

E That's where the altitude tent--sometimes called the hypoxic tent--comes in. Around
     two decades ago, two different scientists had the same exciting thought. If they could
     artificially control the atmosphere within a confined space, they could simulate the
     effects of high altitude and save an athlete at sea-level from the time and expense of
     travelling to higher ground. Altitude tents have improved over the years: they're not as
     hot or as noisy as the early prototypes, and are much cheaper too. They are also
     perfectly lawful. Five years ago, when the tents were investigated by WADA (the World
     Anti-Doping Agency), it was ruled that they did not violate the spirit of distance running.
     It is now routine for athletes to sleep in them in preparation for an event.

F However, it is not the case that all new technologies gain approval. In 2008, a
     staggering 105 world records were broken in swimming, the vast majority achieved by
     competitors wearing the new Speedo LZR Racer suit. These suits use a high-tech
     fabric tested in Nasa's wind tunnels, which reduces drag and improves buoyancy. The
     LZR was initially sanctioned by FINA, the international swimming body. But as better
     suits were produced by Speedo and other manufacturers, and more records were
     broken, they became increasingly controversial. In a 2009 ruling, FINA changed its
     mind, banning all suits made with this high-tech fabric.

G Going faster, higher, stronger is integral to the logic of athletics in general, and the
     Olympics in particular. Athletes believe they need records all the time. And the only way
     is through minute changes of 0.0001 of a second. But when a new technology is
     invented, the relevant sports authority has to consider whether to embrace or reject it.
     In some cases, athletes are granted permission to use the technology: in others, it is
     banned. But whatever the outcome, rulings should not appear arbitrary: arguments
     have to be examined and weighed and the rules of logic ought to apply in every case.
Questions 21 and 22

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Write the correct letters in boxes 21 and 22 on your answer sheet.

Which TWO of the following statements about Ron Clarke are made in the passage?
     A Clarke was not performing well immediately prior to the Mexico Games.
     B The worries Clarke had before the Mexico Games were not taken into account.
     C Clarke's experiences at the Mexico Games are widely talked about today.
     D At one stage of the Mexico Games 10,000 metres, Clarke was near the front.
     E Clarke was the only runner at the Mexico Games who appeared to be affected by
          the altitude.

Questions 23-26

Complete the summary below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answers in boxes 23-26 on your answer sheet.

                        Do all new technologies gain approval?

Some people may be puzzled by attitudes towards performance-enhancing technologies in
sport. For example, why is the altitude tent considered acceptable, but not the LZR Racer
suit? For distance running, WADA concluded that the altitude tent was not contrary to the
23 ________ of the sport. However, the LZR swimsuit, which is made from a special fabric
that aids buoyancy and cuts down 24 ________, was banned.

Athletes think they have to continually set fresh 25 ________. This is made possible by
better 26 ________ and training, as well as improved clothing and equipment. However,
when sports authorities have to decide whether to give permission for a new performance-
enhancing technology to be used, it is important that their decisions are not seen as
arbitrary.
