READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 20
Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
Write the correct number, i-ix, in boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet.

                     List of Headings

                i    The power of sound

                ii   Learning to use language

                iii  Uses that cannot be predicted

                iv   Maintaining pleasant social interaction

                v    A sense of belonging

                vi   Language has more than one purpose

                vii  The meaning of unusual words

                viii Expressing our feelings

                ix   Thinking aloud

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
20 Paragraph G
                   Why do we use language?

   Linguistics expert David Crystal considers some functions of language

A The question 'Why do we use language?' seems hardly to require an answer. 'To
       communicate our ideas' is the usual answer to the question and, indeed, this must surely
       be the most widely recognised function of language. Whenever we tell people about
       ourselves and our circumstances, we are using language in order to exchange facts and
       opinions. This use of language is often called ideational, and is found in any spoken or
       written interaction where people wish to learn from each other. But it would be wrong to
       think of it as the only way in which we use language. Language scholars have identified
       several other functions where the communication of ideas is a marginal or irrelevant
       consideration.

B Consider a situation in which Mr X carefully leans his walking stick against a wall, but it
       falls over. He tries again, and it falls a second time. Mr X curses the walking stick. How
       should we classify this function of language? It cannot be 'communication of ideas', for
       there is no-one else in the room. Here we have one of the commonest uses of language:
       a means of getting rid of our nervous energy when we experience stressful situations. It
       is the clearest case of what is often called an emotive function of language, which is
       most commonly used when we are in a frustrated state or feel anger. But there are also
       many emotive utterances of a positive kind, such as our involuntary verbal reactions to
       beautiful art or scenery, or our articulation of affection towards others. The most
       common such utterances consist of conventional words or phrases (such as 'Oh dear')
       and the semi-linguistic noises often called interjections (such as 'Wow!').

C Take another situation in which Mrs P sneezes violently, Mrs Q says 'Bless you' and Mrs
       P says 'Thank you'. This hardly seems to be a case of language being used to
       communicate ideas, but rather to maintain comfortable relationships between people. Its
       sole function is to provide a means of preventing possible embarrassment to either
       party. No factual content is involved. Similarly, the uses of such phrases as 'Good
       morning' or 'Pleased to meet you', and ritual exchanges about health or the weather, do
       not 'communicate ideas' in the usual sense. This function of language, which arises out
       of the basic human need to signal friendliness - or, at least, lack of enmity - was first
       referred to as phatic communication by the anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski (1884-
       1942).

D There are many situations where the most apparent reason for language being used is
       for the rhythmic or phonetic effect it has on the users or listeners. We can group together
       here such different cases as the rhythmical litanies of religious groups. The persuasive
       cadences of political speechmaking, and the voices of individuals singing in the kitchen
       or bath. Perhaps the clearest cases are the largely nonsensical nature of many
       traditional children's rhymes and playground language games, together with the lyrics of
       popular songs, and the range of phonetic effects which can be encountered in poetry.

E Take the case of a solicitor preparing advice for a client. He pulls down an old book of
       judgements from his shelf, and reads an account of a case which took place 25 years
       ago. What use of language is this? At first sight, it would appear to be ideational; but the
       situation in which the communication takes place is quite different in several respects.
       When data is stored away, it is impossible to foresee who is likely to need it in the future
       and for what purpose; indeed, much of the material may never be referred to again.
       There is therefore no 'dialogue' element in the communication. Accordingly, when
       language is used in this way, it is very different from that used in everyday conversation;
       in particular, it displays a much greater degree of organisation, impersonality, and
       explicitness.
F People often feel the need to verbalise their mental processes. Perhaps the most
       common such use of language is found when people perform mathematical calculations
       'in their head'. Very often, this supposedly 'mental act' is accompanied by a verbal
       commentary. If asked why they do it, they reply that it helps their concentration. Authors
       often make similar remarks about the need to get a first draft down on paper, in order to
       see whether what they have written corresponds to what they had in mind. The French
       essayist Joseph Joubert (1754-1824) once said: 'We only know what we meant to say
       after we have said it.'.

G Crowds attending events such as presidential re-elections often repeatedly shout
       phrases such as 'Four more years!'. What kind of language is this? Such language is
       hardly informative for those who use it, but it plainly has an important role in helping us
       feel we are members of a group; in this case, those who hold the same political views.
       Many public situations display language which unites rather than informs, such as the
       chanting of fans at a football match. Our use of language can tell our listener or reader a
       great deal about ourselves, by the signalling of who we are and what our alliances are.
Questions 21 and 22

Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Write the correct letters in boxes 21 and 22 on your answer sheet.

The list below gives some examples of how language is used.

Which TWO of these examples are mentioned in the text?

          A giving instructions to a listener or reader
          B explaining a particular course of action
          C showing you share opinions with others
          D documenting material to be read at a later date
          E lying about your beliefs

Questions 23 - 26

Complete the summary below.

Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.

Write your answer in boxes 23-26 on your answer sheet.

                           Why do we use language?

The most obvious function of language is to communicate information. This is known as the
23 ............ use of language. However, there are other situations where language is used
without any exchange of information. For example, 24 ............ uses of language, when we
express negative sensations such as 25 ............ or frustration or positive sensations such as
an appreciation of art or affection for friends and family. We also use language without
exchanging information when we engage in what Malinowski called phatic communication.
This type of language use helps to avoid potential 26 ............ and to keep people's
relationships friendly and relaxed. Examples include enquiring about somebody's health or
when we discuss the weather.
