READING PASSAGE 2

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2
below.
Questions 14 - 20

Reading Passage 2 has seven paragraphs, A-G.

Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.

Write the correct number, i-ix, in boxes 14-20 on your answer sheet.

                List of Headings

i  Performance in daily life

ii Seeking help from established artists

iii A variety of ways to improve performance

iv Different reasons for making the same choice

v Difficulties in understanding what makes a good performance

vi Learning to overcome setbacks

vii Considerable financial rewards for excellence

viii Factors which make musicians more aware of performance

ix The constant search for perfection

14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
20 Paragraph G
          What does performance involve?

A Some musicians take up music because of the excitement inherent in performance. In
     time, these musicians often find that their initial attraction to the rewards of performance
     becomes less important as a love for the music itself grows. Others are attracted to the
     music first and a love of performance may come later. However, while music study and
     performance are inextricably linked, a performance is usually regarded as a distinct and
     separate goal, and a unique event, containing a certain amount of unpredictability.

B Performance offers the possibility of an intensely satisfying experience. Yet, although
     complete fulfilment seems within a performer's grasp, it is never promised
     unconditionally and never fully realized. Notwithstanding these frustrations, musicians
     and other performers continue to be drawn to performance as the consummation of their
     achievement. Moreover, as the performance is completed, regardless of its degree of
     success, they experience the drive to perform again and again, trying each time to make
     the performance better, more precise, more deeply expressive. Thus they live with the
     frustration of never quite reaching the faultless outcome they would like to see, but they
     are never free of their desire to pursue this goal.

C It is helpful for musicians to step back from the intensity of their pursuit. They should look
     around and realize many of the processes and challenges they face in dealing with
     musical performance apply to a wide variety of activities. To musicians, performance
     takes place on a stage, before an audience, or in front of a camera or a microphone. But
     in reality, performances go on all around us; a large number of routine undertakings can
     be treated as performance challenges. Adopting such an attitude opens the door to
     improving skills that contribute significantly not only toward successful musical
     performance, but also toward achieving many of our other life goals. These endeavours
     include participation in sports and games, presentations at university or work, social
     events like weddings, or simply occasions like meeting authority figures or making small
     talk with the boss.

D Under certain external conditions, everyday practicing can begin to take on a more
     specifically performance-oriented feel for musicians. For example, if they perceive that
     music-making will result in far-reaching, important consequences, playing or singing
     tends to go from being simply an enjoyable pastime to being a performance activity.
     Similarly, if the music they are learning must be ready within a given period, playing or
     singing that music begins to be regarded as performance oriented. This is especially true
     if there is a fixed date for this act to take place. Moreover, if they believe they are
     attempting to play or sing something generally regarded as difficult or unusual, they start
     to think of the piece in terms of performance. How clearly all these factors are perceived,
     as well as the intensity of their influence, fluctuates greatly, often changing from day to
     day or even hour to hour.

E To complicate matters, it remains difficult to identify exactly what it is that enables
     someone to turn in a successful performance. After decades of study and research, the
     components that make up successful performance remain elusive, differing not only from
     individual to individual but also from circumstance to circumstance. Even after years of
     experience, veteran performers cannot and do not take for granted the skills necessary
     to turn in a first-rate performance. After even hundreds of successful performances, most
     performers still have to deal with tension every time. Furthermore, there often seems
     little correlation between the amount of nervous tension and the resulting degree of
     success.

F Notwithstanding the problems attending performing, there are various means of
     strengthening one's ability in this area. Self-exploration, for example, helps build esteem
     and creativity. Preparation to train and consolidate performance skills is also essential,
     and psychological exercises can be practiced which go some way to generating the
     stamina and courage required during performance. Feedback too, whether from friends
     or colleagues or arising from self-reflection, can be priceless. And just occasionally one
     finds true inspiration; having done so, the desire is there to repeat the experience. All of
     these means are available to every individual, but they do not simply happen. They must
     be practiced and reflected upon regularly over a period of time before they begin to take
     effect, in the same way that healthy lifestyle choices only work if kept up.

G One cannot guarantee that each and every performance will exhibit the best
     representation of one's skills or abilities. Musicians often feel flat following a
     performance, and sometimes find it hard to cope with a critical review in the media.
     Notwithstanding these inescapable hurdles, their ability to deal with the emotion of
     performance does gradually grow with experience. Their chances of achieving a
     personal best during the excitement of performance thus tend to grow too. And finally,
     they do begin to reach their goals of fame or simply self-satisfaction, as a result of a
     series of successful performances.
Questions 21 and 22

Choose TWO letters, A-E

Write the correct letters in boxes 21 and 22 on your answer sheet

The passage refers to a number of non-musical undertakings involving performance.

Which TWO of the following are mentioned by the writer?

A  appearing in a theatrical production

B  presenting trophies to successful athletes

C  chatting with an employer

D  posing for a professional photographer

E  delivering information in an educational setting

Questions 23 - 26
Complete the sentences below.
Choose ONE WORD ONLY from the passage for each answer.
Write your answers in boxes 23-26 on your answer sheet.
23 Psychological training can help to increase the energy and ............ that performance

      demands.

24 One thing that can be extremely valuable for performers is ............ , whether given by
      others or coming from themselves.

25 Seeing a negative ............ after a performance can be upsetting for musicians.

26 A variety of ............ can ultimately be achieved thanks to repeated successes.
.
