READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

                           All in the family

A person's brothers and sisters can have a powerful effect on their adult
                                         behaviour

We can choose our friends, the saying goes, but we cannot choose our family of origin. Our
parents provide the genetic material and make powerful early role models, but even more
influential in determining what kind of adult we will become are our brothers and sisters - our
siblings. They occupy a position of unique intimacy in our lives and cast a longer shadow than
many recognise or are prepared to acknowledge. By turns enraging and lovable, familiar and
mysterious, our brothers and sisters are the human beings who people our first social
relationships. And a sibling relationship is the most enduring relationship many of us will ever
have less emotionally intense than the bonds we form with our spouses and our own children if
only because they started when we were so young.

Surprising new research by Dr Gene Brody found that having older children who do well in
school and are well liked by other children leads to parental 'basking' - increasing mothers' self-
esteem. It is clear that in turn this is associated with more positive parenting of younger children,
who display fewer behavioural problems as a result. Conversely, parents who get a difficult first
child may in turn experience a negative spiral of household tension.

International sports star Piri Weepu is a rugby hard man, but at least some of his tough
temperament was forged long ago in the family home. His older brother Billy started rugby-
tackling little Piri when he was just four - to 'harden him up'. It seemed to work: Piri followed his
brother in playing for the under-sevens league before he even started school. There are as
many such stories as there are families: in the formative hothouse of the family, siblings interact
in complex ways with the powerful forcefields of parents, genetics and personality already at
work. It starts with birth order, which determines play roles: the firstborn leader, the middle-child
mediator and the rebellious youngest. These are roles than can stick for life.

Clinical psychologist Claire Cartwright says she has clients who believe, and it might not have
been true, that they were treated differently from their siblings, that one child in the family was
preferred over others. They are quite convinced that the parental judgements on them all those
years ago were harsher, and that they were the ones who always got into trouble. Later, in the
workplace, such a person might be particularly defensive, and so behave in a way more prone
to attracting harsh judgements.

However, the research shows that being Mummy or Daddy's favourite has its own traps. If you
were the easy-going, co-operative child at home, you probably excelled at pleasing parents and,
later, bosses. But you might, as an adult, find it hard to be assertive with authority figures and
lack direction. On the other hand, the sibling who is disruptive and annoying as a child may be
able to reinterpret that role later, turning those attention-seeking characteristics into strengths
like determination and leadership.

How is it that full siblings, despite sharing DNA, can turn out so differently? One answer is that,
in fact, each sibling grows up in a different family, a unique micro-culture. For example, the
firstborn is, for a while, an only child, and therefore has a completely different experience of the
parents than those born later. The parents themselves are growing up too, weathering hardship
or good fortune, so one sibling might experience stability and closeness while another might be
raised in the midst of crisis.

Of course, there are many positive aspects of sibling relationships. Annette Henderson, a
lecturer in psychology, says firstborn children learn vocabulary more quickly than their siblings
because they are not competing to spend one-on-one time with parents. But younger children in
turn benefit from unintentional instruction from their bigger brothers and sisters, acquiring entire
phrases and an understanding of social concepts such as politeness. Similarly, a Cambridge
University study of 140 children found that even when there is a great deal of conflict, siblings
will still create a rich world of play and make-believe that extends them developmentally. Love-
hate relationships were common among the children, but even those who fought the most had
as many positive interactions as the other sibling pairs. It is also true that children compete for
parental attention by making themselves different from their brothers and sisters, particularly if
they are close in age. A 2003 research paper studied adolescents from 185 families over two
years, finding that those who changed, to differentiate themselves from their siblings, increased
the amount of warmth they gained from parents, and also developed stronger personalities and
a better sense of their own identity.

Another consideration is that many families today are smaller and more intimate than their
historical counterparts. This may be advantageous because siblings tend to know each other
better and remain lifelong friends compared to children from bigger or more widely spaced
families, who perhaps lose touch with one another after leaving home. Then there was a 2010
American study which found that having a sister, whether younger or older, meant that 10- to
14-year-olds were less likely to feel lonely, unloved, self-conscious or fearful. The same study
found that having a loving sibling of either gender promoted good deeds, such as helping a
neighbour around the house or helping other children at school.
Questions 27-30

Do the following statements agree with the claim of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet, write

YES              if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO               if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN        if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

27 Parents and siblings play equal roles in shaping people's adult personalities.

28 People's first social relationships tend to be with siblings of their own gender.

29 People's relationships with their siblings tend to receive less attention when they marry.

30 Parental 'basking' is advantageous for later siblings.

Questions 31 - 34

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 31-34 on your answer sheet.

31 What point does the writer make about birth order in the third paragraph?

                   A Its role is underestimated by parents.
                   B It may shape the characteristics of adults.
                   C Its importance decreases as children grow up.
                   D It has more influence on personality than genetics.

32 What are we told about some of Claire Cartwright's clients?

                   A Their parents treated them fairly.
                   B They were treated harshly by their siblings.
                   C Their perceptions of childhood may be inaccurate.
                   D They have closer relations with their siblings as adults.

33 What is the writer's main point about siblings in the fifth paragraph?

                   A Parents tend to repeat their own parents' mistakes.
                   B Favoured children are likely to make good leaders as adults.
                   C Negative characteristics in children can become positive in adults.
                   D Attention-seeking children are unlikely to please bosses in later life.
34 Which of the following best summarises the writer's argument in the sixth
          paragraph?

                   A Many children have a favourite parent.
                   B Parenting skills improve with later children.
                   C Siblings are born with different personalities.
                   D The family environment may change over time.

Questions 35 - 40

Complete the summary using the list of words, A-K, below.

Write the correct letter, A-K, in boxes 35-40 on your answer sheet.

                The positive aspects of sibling relationships

Annette Henderson suggests that young children's interactions with older siblings involve 35
............ . Also, a Cambridge study found that siblings still enjoy 36 ............ even when they
have a tendency to fight. Research conducted in 2003 suggests that children develop 37
............ as a result of seeking attention. Another factor is the trend for smaller families, which
may mean that today's siblings enjoy 38 ............ as adults. A 2010 American study linked
having a sister with 39 ............ among children aged 10-14. Finally, having a sibling may
promote 40 ............ according to the same study.

A parental love         B imaginative games  C physical development
D generous behaviour    E strong marriages   F greater individuality
G learning experiences  H career success     I closer relationships
J healthy competition   K mental well-being
