READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

               Art-based training for engineers

An assessment of how effective an art-based program was in improving
                       the communication skills of engineers

The CONNECT Program in the Engineering School of The Cooper Union for the Advancement
of Science and Art has served as a laboratory for testing the effectiveness of art-based learning
for technical graduates. Our underlying concept with CONNECT is that most communication
breakdowns involving engineers happen because they know every aspect of their subject matter
and assume that others do too. Engineers spend a great deal of time ensuring their work is
accurate, and their solutions to engineering problems are workable, meet official requirements,
are environmentally sound, and so on. They are persuaded by sound content. Others may not
be.

Communicating with an audience is essentially a social skill with a behavioral basis. A fact that
becomes all too apparent when one's audience has a divergent set of assumptions. Failing to
understand your audience opens up an 'audience gap'. To give engineering graduates the skills
to close this gap. CONNECT turned to the theatre. Performing artists specialize in the effective
communication of any content- good, bad, or indifferent-through vocal, physical, and socially
appropriate behaviors keyed to a particular audience. CONNECT applied stage movement
analysis to interaction with clients, meetings with colleagues, and job interviews. It also made
use of vocal and physical exercises and directing techniques, to equip technical personnel for
the everyday communication challenges they face, as well as for formal talks.

Attending workshops based on the CONNECT model resulted in observably improved
behaviors. Our data demonstrate that, while not every engineer is likely to become a great
communicator, almost all are capable of becoming better communicators. In a survey of
corporate recruiters, potential employees who had taken one or more CONNECT workshops
were rated higher overall in areas such as confidence and maturity than those who had not
participated in CONNECT. Those who had taken a range of workshops, including one in
advanced non-verbal behavior, were rated even higher. These results were achieved after
mixed early assessment results led us to significantly refine our methods.

Just as important to the improvements we saw after the first year was an adjustment to how we
approached the students themselves. We needed to practice what we reached, and that meant
understanding our own audience of young engineers. We needed to behave in ways that would
get through to them. Too often in early workshops, our performer-facilitators assumed that a
technical audience would respond to theatrical training material in the same positive way that
performers did. However, we came to realize that technical audiences need to be approached
differently if arts-based training is to achieve its full potential.

Adjusting our approach to achieve this was key to the improvement in results. Changing how we
behaved toward our audience of young engineers required real sensitivity to what was
happening in the workshops, and to how our facilitators related to the students. What we
learned during this process can be distilled into 'rules' for maximizing the effectiveness of
performing-arts -based training in a technical field.

The first 'rule' is to customize on a continual basis, adapting a performance for a particular
audience is second nature to performing artists. What works on Friday night may not work at the
Sunday matinee. Similarly, what is effective in training chemical engineers may not work for
their civil engineering or electrical engineering colleagues. And what works for engineers in
general will certainly not work for each individual engineer. We have recognized the value of
individualized attention and our facilitators send each participant away with something specific
to his or her needs.

A second 'rule' is to avoid being 'touchy feely' unless the purpose is clear. Although actors do
not think twice about standing in a circle and 'passing a ball of energy' from person to person, or
closing their eyes and imaging themselves at a 'favourite place' the majority of engineers do not
respond in quite the same way. In fact, the CONNECT participants often felt that this part of the
workshop was a 'waste of time'. And nothing- nothing- is more counterproductive when it comes
to coaching technical trainees. However, when the value of such activities is clearly related to
the stated purpose of the workshop- to improve performance-few people will get the point more
quickly than an engineer.

There are at least three approaches possible for facilitating a workshop, and the final' rule' is to
incorporate these in the most appropriate way. The 'prescriptive' approach tells trainees what is
necessary, the 'experiential' approach lets them personally experience what happens when a
new element is added to a situation, and the 'demonstrative' approach requires them to observe
certain ways of doing things. The prescriptive approach, although the engineers tended to
expect it, was by far the least effective, while the experiential approach met resistance because
the purpose of the exercise was not always immediately obvious. The demonstrative approach,
on the other hand, mirrors the way technical objects are accomplished, which is to solve
problems through testing and observation. The observation of effective and ineffective
communication behaviors in others proved to be a good way of demonstrating the options
available to everyone.

These 'rules' are, of course, only a starting point. We have learned to apply them both rigorously
and with flexibility. At the Engineering School of The Cooper Union, customization meant
establishing a mini-conservatory. We have learned that you can't close someone else's
audience gap without looking at things from their perspective. In another setting, playing to the
technical audience might require a completely different sort of customization and a subtly
different set of training behaviors. What CONNECT has shown is that knowing one's audience -
and knowing it specifically rather than generally - is fundamental.
Questions 27 - 32
Complete the summary using the list of words, A-I, below.
Write the correct letter, A-I, in boxes 27-32 on your answer sheet.

                                 The CONNECT workshop

The concept behind the CONNECT program is that the 27 ............ in communication
experienced by engineers, are due to their tendency to concentrate on technical
28 ............ rather than adapt their approach to meet the 29 ............ of their audience.

This is mainly because engineers are used to focusing on the accuracy of their work and
ensuring that it complies with 30 ............ . Thus, the program aimed to provide technical
graduates with the 31 ............ they needed to bridge the resulting communication gap.

Having developed an awareness of the audience, the engineers would then be in a better
position to give effective 32 ............ and communicate more appropriately in
everyday situations.

A presentations  B details        C efficiencies
D regulations    E interruptions  F expectations
G failures       H actions        I tools
Questions 33 - 36

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 33-36 on your answer sheet, write

YES                if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO                 if the statement contradicts with the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN          if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

33 The study carried out by CONNECT indicates that any technical graduate has the ability
      to become an expert communicator.

34 Employers said that they were particularly keen to hire technical graduates who had
      attended sessions in time management.

35 Assessment results from the early workshops led to changes being made to the delivery
      of the CONNECT program.

36 It became apparent that some of the CONNECT participants were too young to
      appreciate the purpose of the workshops.
Questions 37 - 40

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 37-40 on your answer sheet.

37 What is the writer doing in the fifth paragraph?

A                  advising trainers on how they should incorporate the rules into

                   workshops.

B                  comparing how the young engineers reacted to the content of the

                   workshops.

C                  explaining the context in which the rules for effective training were

                   arrived at.

D                  describing how trainers assessed the performance of workshop

                   participants.

38 In the seventh paragraph, what does the writer say about activities such as 'passing a
          ball of energy'?

A                  The timing had to be adapted to make them suitable for the engineers.

B                  The point of them had to be explained to the engineers numerous

                   times.

C                  The engineers were initially unconvinced of their value.

D                  The engineers misunderstood how they should be performed.

39 What does the writer attribute the success of the demonstrative approach to?

A                  lt complemented the way the technical graduates usually worked.

B                  It was a highly innovative method of working.

C                  It combined well with the two other approaches.

D                  It met the participants expectations about a workshop situation.

40 What is the writer's main point in the final paragraph?

A                  The differences between the facilitators and the trainees remained

                   immense.

B                  The facilitators had to put into practice what they were attempting to

                   teach.

C                  The program that has been developed is suitable for any technical

                   audience.

D                  The facilitators on the program acknowledged they had learned very

                   little
