READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

           Child's Play in Medieval England

   Professor Nicholas Orme investigates childhood in the Middle Ages

A `Play up! Play up! And play the game!' The ringing chorus of Sir Henry Newbolt's
      celebrated cricket poem `Vitai Lampada' (1908) sums up views about play in 19th- and
      early 20th-century Britain. Children's play was important, and adults should regulate and
      direct it. Games promoted endurance, self-discipline and team spirit - qualities needed
      for the health of society and government. Newbolt was one in a long line of people who
      thought in this way. The notion that children's play should be used for educational and
      social purposes goes back at least to the ancient Greeks and the toys and games of
      medieval England tell us much about how adults then saw childhood. But they also
      reveal a good deal about children themselves, and cast light on what has recently
      become a controversial issue.

B Forty years ago, the French historian Philippe Aries argued, in Centuries of Childhood,
      that childhood in the Middle Ages did not exist in its modern sense. Children were
      regarded by adults with relatively little affection and followed a way of life not very
      different from that of their elders. More recent historians have disputed this, pointing to
      plentiful signs of parental affection and arguing that childhood, by its very nature, must
      always have been much the same.

C In this debate play is crucial. Did adults encourage it? If so, did they see it as recreational
      (by providing toys, for example) or as educational (making children play in particular
      ways)? Did children play as their elders told them, or did they invent their own games,
      away from adults and even against their wishes? These questions can be answered from
      a rich body of evidence including actual toys of the period, pictures of children's activities
      in contemporary manuscripts and literary sources such as religious works and
      dictionaries. We know not only how medieval English children played but what their
      elders thought on the subject.

D We know, for example, that adults gave children toys from infancy onwards. In 1398 the
      writer John Trevisa describes babies playing with `a child's brooch', an object similar in
      function to the bright plastic toys given to babies today to bite and handle. William
      Horman, 16th-century author of a Latin textbook, talks of buying a rattle to stop a baby
      crying. Indeed, by 1300 it appears there was a toy industry in England. Boys' toys often
      took military forms, such as the two metal soldiers of that date, found in London, and
      made from a mould. Girls had dolls, known before the 17th century as `poppets' or `not
      that children were by any means dependent on things that were bought for them. Gerald
      of Wales recalls how he and his brothers built towns, palaces, churches and monasteries
      from sand at Manorbier Castle in about 1150 (perhaps on the nearby beach).
E Active games were universal. In his English-to-Latin dictionary of 1440, a mysterious
      recluse known as Geoffrey mentions children playing `tennis' and swinging on what he
      calls a `totter' or `merrytotter'. Children chased each other, swam and played ball games.
      Boys in the later Middle Ages shot arrows with bows, and archery is an example of a
      sport encouraged by adults, who wanted boys to grow up to play their part in what was,
      for most men, a warrior society.

F However, by no means all children's military activity was directed by adults. In 1400, six
      months after King Richard II had been overthrown by Henry IV, the children of London
      gathered together and chose themselves kings. Adam of Usk tells us they congregated
      `in thousands ... and made war upon each other ... whereby many died'. The new king
      had to order their parents and masters to stop them.

G This willingness of children to take the initiative in play, not just to wait for adults to direct
      them, is evident in the way they observed the calendar. Medieval life was regulated by
      light, weather, crops and the Church's cycle of fasts and festivals. Children shared in the
      adult round of religious festivals, but had their own observances as well, semi-detached
      from their elders. In the 1200s, the priest Thomas Docking remarked that in spring a child
      `follows the ploughman; in autumn he accompanies the grape-gatherers'.

      In 1518, the poet Alexander Barclay records children playing with tops in March, looking
      for fruit in summer and making footballs by filling pigs' bladders with dried peas in
      autumn.

H It is clear from this evidence that the relationship between adults and children in medieval
      society was, in major respects, a modern one. Parents took an indulgent interest in their
      children, providing them with toys and giving them time to play. Children played in a wide
      variety of ways - imaginatively, skilfully, athletically and violently - developing their
      minds, bodies and social skills. Adults tried at times to direct play - partly to keep
      children in order, partly to give them skills for adult life - but children gravitated to one
      another and formed a culture of their own. We can answer Aries's thesis, then, with a
      resounding `No!'. Childhood has always been much the same.
Questions 27 - 31

Reading Passage 3 has eight paragraphs, A-H.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 27-31 on your answer sheet.

27 economic evidence for play in medieval England

28 an example of how children created their own toys

29 an example of warlike play approved by grown-ups

30 a political event mirrored in children's play

31 the origin of an academic debate about medieval life

Questions 32 - 35

Look at the following dates (Questions 32-35) and the list of events below.

Match each date with the correct event, A-J.

Write the correct letter, A-J, in boxes 32-35 on your answer sheet.

32 The first electric telegraph system was submitted to the Admiralty.

33 Ronalds received official recognition of his contribution to telegraphy.

34 The first electric telegraph was patented.

35 Ronalds began to experiment with electricity.

                                                   List of Events
                                   A invention of cricket
                                   B children picking grapes
                                   C poem about value of games
                                   D early toy manufacturing in England
                                   E puppets first imported into England
                                   F dolls taxed in England
                                   G death of Adam of Usk
                                   H children playing tennis
                                   I children's gang warfare
                                   J a description of seasonal activities
Questions 36 - 40

Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet, write

TRUE               if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE              if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN          if there is no information on this

36 Little is known about adult attitudes to children's play in the Middle Ages.

37 Most toys were imported into England before 1300.

38 Medieval children celebrated the seasons in their own ways.

39 Medieval children made presents for their parents on special occasions.

40 Parents and children in the Middle Ages behaved much as they do today.
