READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading
Passage 3 below.

                    Inside the mind of a fan

                                     How watching sport affects the brain

A At about the same time that the poet Homer invented the epic there, the ancient Greeks
     started a festival in which men competed in a single race, about 200 metres long. The
     winner received a branch of wild olives. The Greeks called this celebration the
     Olympics. Though the ancient sprint remains, today the Olympics are far more than
     that. Indeed, the Games seem to celebrate the dream of progress as embodied in the
     human form. That the Games are intoxicating to watch is beyond question. During the
     Athens Olympics in 2004, 3.4 billion people, half the world, watched them on television.
     Certainly, being a spectator is a thrilling experience--but why?

B In 1996, three Italian neuroscientists, Giacomo Rizzolatti, Leonardo Fogassi and
     Vittorio Gallese, examined the premotor cortex of monkeys. They discovered that inside
     these primate brains there were groups of cells that `store vocabularies of motor
     actions', just as there are grammars of movement. These networks of cells are the
     bodily `sentences' we use every day, the ones our brain has chosen to retain and
     refine. Think, for example, about a golf swing. To those who have only watched the
     Masters Tournament on TV, golfing seems easy. To the novice, however, the skill of
     casting a smooth arc with a lopsided metal stick is virtually impossible. This is because
     most novices swing with their consciousness, using an area of the brain next to the
     premotor cortex. To the expert, on the other hand, a perfectly balanced stroke is
     second nature. For him, the motor action has become memorized, and the movements
     are embedded in the neurons of his premotor cortex. He hits the ball with the tranquility
     of his perfected autopilot.

C These neurons in the premotor cortex, besides explaining why certain athletes seem to
     possess almost unbelievable levels of skill, have an even more amazing characteristic,
     one that caused Rizzolatti, Fogassi and Gallese to give them the lofty title `mirror
     neurons'. They note that `the main functional characteristic of mirror neurons is that
     they become active both when the monkey performs a particular action (for example,
     grasping an object or holding it) and, astonishingly, when it sees another individual
     performing a similar action'. Humans have an even more elaborate mirror neuron
     system. These peculiar cells mirror, inside the brain, the outside world: they enable us
     to internalize the actions of another. In order to be activated, though, these cells require
     what the scientists call `goal-orientated movements'. If we are staring at a photograph,
     a fixed image of a runner mid-stride, our mirror neurons are totally silent. They only fire
     when the runner is active: running, moving or sprinting.
D What these electrophysiological studies indicate is that when we watch a golfer or a
     runner in action, the mirror neurons in our own premotor cortex light up as if we were
     the ones competing. This phenomenon of neural mirroring was first discovered in 1954,
     when two French physiologists, Gastaut and Bert, found that the brains of humans
     vibrate with two distinct wavelengths, alpha and mu. The mu system is involved in
     neural mirroring. It is active when our bodies are still, and disappears whenever we do
     something active, like playing a sport or changing the TV channel. The surprising fact is
     that the mu signal is also quiet when we watch someone else being active, as on TV.
     These results are the effect of mirror neurons.

E Rizzolatti, Fogassi and Gallese call the idea of mirror neurons the `direct matching
     hypothesis'. They believe that we only understand the movement of sports stars when
     we `map the visual representation of the observed action onto our motor representation
     of the same action'. According to this theory, watching an Olympic athlete `causes the
     motor system of the observer to resonate. The `motor knowledge' of the observer is
     used to understand the observed action.' But mirror neurons are more than just the
     neural basis for our attitude to sport. It turns out that watching a great golfer makes us
     better golfers, and watching a great sprinter actually makes us run faster. This ability to
     learn by watching is a crucial skill. From the acquisition of language as infants to
     learning facial expressions, mimesis (copying) is an essential part of being conscious.
     The best athletes are those with a premotor cortex capable of imagining the
     movements of victory, together with the physical properties to make those movements
     real.

F But how many of us regularly watch sports in order to be a better athlete? Rather, we
     watch sport for the feeling, the human drama. This feeling also derives from mirror
     neurons. By letting spectators share in the motions of victory, they also allow us to
     share in its feelings. This is because they are directly connected to the amygdala, one
     of the main brain regions involved in emotion. During the Olympics, the mirror neurons
     of whole nations will be electrically identical, their athletes causing spectators to feel,
     just for a second or two, the same thing. Watching sports brings people together. Most
     of us will never run a mile in under four minutes, or hit a home run. Our consolation
     comes in watching. When we gather around the TV, we all feel, just for a moment, what
     it is to do something perfectly.
Questions 27-32
Reading Passage has six paragraphs, A-F.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 27-32 on your answer sheet.
NB You may use any letter more than once.
27 an explanation of why watching sport may be emotionally satisfying
28 an explanation of why beginners find sporting tasks difficult
29 a factor that needs to combine with mirroring to attain sporting excellence
30 a comparison of human and animal mirror neurons
31 the first discovery of brain activity related to mirror neurons
32 a claim linking observation to improvement in performance
Questions 33-35

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 33-35 on your answer sheet.

33 The writer uses the term `grammar of movement' to mean
     A a level of sporting skill.
     B a system of words about movement.
     C a pattern of connected cells.
     D a type of golf swing.

34 The writer states that expert players perform their actions
     A without conscious thought.
     B by planning each phase of movement.
     C without regular practice.
     D by thinking about the actions of others.

35 The writer states that the most common motive for watching sport is to
     A improve personal performance.
     B feel linked with people of different nationalities.
     C experience strong positive emotions.
     D realize what skill consists of.

Questions 36-40

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet, write:

YES              if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO               if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN        if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

36 Inexpert sports players are too aware of what they are doing.

37 Monkeys have a more complex mirror neuron system than humans.

38 Looking at a photograph can activate mirror neurons.

39 Gastaut and Bert were both researchers and sports players.

40 The mu system is at rest when we are engaged in an activity.
