READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading
Passage 3 below.

              Looking at daily life in ancient Rome

 In this preface to a history, the writer explains the factors affecting the scope of his study.

If our ideas on Roman life are not to become lost in confusion, we must study it within a
strictly defined time. Nothing changes more rapidly than human customs. Looking at our
own more familiar world, apart from the great scientific discoveries of recent centuries
which have turned it upside down--steam, electricity, railways, motor cars and aeroplanes,
for example--it is clear that the elementary forms of everyday life have been subject to
increasing change. Potatoes, for example, were not introduced into Europe until the
sixteenth century, coffee was first drunk there in the late sixteenth or early seventeenth, and
the banana was used in desserts in Europe at the beginning of the twentieth. The law of
change was not less operative in antiquity. It was a commonplace of Roman rhetoric to
contrast the crude simplicity of the Republic (509BC-27BC) with the luxury and refinement
of the imperial times which followed. There is no common measure, whether of home, or
house, or furniture, between ages which are so different.

Since a choice of time must necessarily be made, this history will confine itself to studying
the generation which was born about the middle of the first century AD, toward the end of
the reign of Claudius (41-54AD) or the beginning of the reign of Nero (54-68AD), and
which lived on into the reign of Trajan (98-117AD) or of Hadrian (117-138AD). This
generation saw the Roman Empire at its most powerful and prosperous. It was witness to
the last conquests of the Caesars: the conquest of Dacia, in modern-day eastern Europe,
which brought vast mineral wealth into the Empire, and the conquest of Arabia, which
helped to bring the riches of India and East Asia flooding into Rome. In the material domain,
this generation attained the pinnacle of ancient civilisation.

By a fortunate coincidence--all the more fortunate in that Latin* literature was soon to run
nearly dry--this generation is the one whose records combine to offer us the most complete
picture of Roman life that we possess. We have a profusion of vivid and picturesque
descriptions, precise and colourful, in such works as the Epigrams of Martial, the Satires of
Juvenal and the Letters of Pliny. In addition, the Forum of Trajan in Rome itself and the
ruins of Herculaneum and Pompeii, the two prosperous resorts buried by the eruption of
Mount Vesuvius in 79AD, supply an immense fund of archaeological evidence. Later
excavations have also restored to us the ruins of the city of Ostia, which date in the main
from the time when the Emperor Hadrian created this great commercial city as a realisation
of his town planning ideas. Fortune has favoured the historian of this time.

* Latin: the language of ancient Rome.
It is not enough to focus our study of Roman life only on a fixed time. It would lack
foundation and consistency if we did not also focus it in space--in the country or in the
town. Even today when the facilities for communication bring something of the city into the
smallest and most isolated country cottage, there remains a significant difference between
rural existence and the excitement of city life: a much greater gulf separated the peasant
from the townsman of antiquity. So large was the inequality between them that, according
to the historian Rostovtzeff, it pitted one against the other in a fierce and silent struggle
which pierced the wall protecting the Roman privileged classes from the barbarian flood
from the north. When the barbarian forces began to invade Roman territory, the peasants
decided to fight alongside them.

The townsman, in fact, enjoyed all the goods and resources of the earth. The peasant knew
nothing but unending labour without profit, and was unable to enjoy the activities available
in even the poorest of cities: the liveliness of the sports field, the warmth of the public baths
and the magnificence of public spectacles. In a work on the history of everyday life, we
must give up any attempt to blend two such dissimilar pictures into one, and must choose
between them. The time which we have chosen to describe day by day is that of those
Roman subjects who spent their time exclusively in the town, or rather in The City, Rome,
which they regarded as the hub and centre of the universe, proud and wealthy ruler of a
world which seemed at that time to have been pacified for ever.

To perform our task well, we must first try to form an adequate picture of the surroundings
in which our subjects lived, and by which their lives were coloured, freeing ourselves from
any misconceptions concerning it. We must seek to reconstruct the physical nature of the
great city and the social milieu of the various classes of the hierarchy by which it was
governed. We must also investigate the moral background of thought and sentiment which
can help explain both its strength and its weaknesses. The way in which the Romans of
Rome employed their time can only be studied satisfactorily after we have plotted out the
main lines of the framework within which they lived and outside of which the routine of their
daily life would be more or less unintelligible.
Questions 27-30

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet.

27 What does the writer say about the period mentioned in the second paragraph?
     A There was a high level of immigration into Rome.
     B The export of minerals made Rome rich.
     C Rome sent armies to control trade with India and East Asia.
     D The Roman standard of living reached its highest level.

28 Ostia is mentioned as
     A a city which often features in literature.
     B an important area for archaeological research.
     C the birthplace of a Roman Emperor.
     D a city whose layout was similar to that of Rome.

29 The statement that `Fortune has favoured the historian of this time' refers to the fact that
     A historians of this period have become wealthy as a result of their discoveries.
     B works on this period are popular among the reading public.
     C a wide range of sources is available for this period.
     D this period has been less studied than many others.

30 In comparing urban and rural life in the Roman Empire, the writer states that
     A rural Romans were largely illiterate.
     B rural life and urban life had little in common.
     C little information is available concerning rural life.
     D most readers of history are more interested in city life.
Questions 31-35

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 31-35 on your answer sheet, write

YES              if the statement agrees with the views of the writer
NO               if the statement contradicts the views of the writer
NOT GIVEN        if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

31 Rome's conquest of Arabia resulted in large-scale immigration from the east into Rome.

32 More can be learned about Roman life from the literature of the period studied in this
     book than from later Latin literature.

33 Discoveries at Herculaneum and Pompeii showed that certain beliefs about Roman life
     were wrong.

34 Roman peasants provided assistance to the Empire when it was attacked.

35 Rural inhabitants of the Roman Empire had a difficult life.

36 Entertainment facilities were limited to the city of Rome itself.

Questions 37-40
Complete the summary using the list of words, A-I, below.
Write the correct letter, A-I, in boxes 37-40 on your answer sheet.

                             The scope of the writer's study

It was important for the writer to limit several aspects of his 37 _____. He decided to
focus on a limited 38 _____ in Roman history, and to concentrate on the section of the
population who were 39 _____. The writer was interested in the physical environment,
the people that ruled the country and the 40 ______ that contributed both to Rome's
strength and to its weaknesses.

A emperors       B setting                  C values
D peasants       E city-dwellers            F social classes
G myths          H period                   I investigation
