READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

                       Motivating employees

Nitin Nohria, Boris Groysberg and Linda-Eling Lee examine current research
into what motivates employees, and report on their own research in this area

Getting people to do their best work, even in trying circumstances, is one of a manager's most
enduring challenges. Indeed, deciphering what motivates us as human beings is a centuries-old
puzzle. Some of history's most influential thinkers about human behavior among them Aristotle in
the ancient world and Sigmund Freud in the early 20th century have struggled to understand its
nuances and have taught us a tremendous amount about why people do the things they do.
Some philosophers, however, didn't have the advantage of knowledge gleaned from modern
brain science. Imagine trying to infer how a car works by examining its movements (starting,
stopping, accelerating, turning) without being able to take apart the engine.

Fortunately, new cross-disciplinary research in fields like neuroscience, biology and evolutionary
psychology has allowed us to learn more about the human brain. Our synthesis of this research
suggests that people are guided by four basic emotional needs, or drives, that are the product of
our common evolutionary heritage. These are the drives to acquire, bond, comprehend, and
defend. Because these four drives are hardwired into our brains, the degree to which they are
satisfied directly affects our emotions and, by extension, our behavior. Let's look at how each
one operates.

The drive to acquire. We are all driven to acquire goods that bolster our sense of well-being.
We experience delight when this drive is fulfilled, discontentment when it is thwarted. This
phenomenon applies not only to physical goods like clothing, housing and money, but also to
events that improve social status, such as being promoted. The drive to acquire tends to be
relative (we always compare what we have with what others possess) and insatiable (we always
want more). That explains why people always care not just about their own compensation
packages but about others' as well.

The drive to bond. Many animals bond with their parents, kinship group, or tribe, but only
humans extend that connection to larger collectives such as organizations and nations. When
fulfilled, this drive is associated with strong positive emotions like love and caring and, when not,
with negative ones like loneliness. At work, the drive to bond accounts for the enormous boost in
motivation when employees feel proud of belonging to the organization, and for their loss of
morale when the institution betrays them. It also explains why employees find it hard to break out
of a work group: people become attached to their closest co-workers.

The drive to comprehend. We want very much to make sense of the world around us, to
produce theories that make events comprehensible. We are frustrated when things seem
senseless, and we are invigorated by the challenge of working out answers. In the workplace,
the drive to comprehend accounts for the desire to make a meaningful contribution. Employees
are motivated by jobs that challenge them and enable them to grow and learn, and they are
demoralized by those that seem to be monotonous or lead to a dead end. Talented employees
who feel trapped often leave their companies to find new challenges elsewhere.

The drive to defend. We all naturally defend ourselves, our property, our family and friends and
our ideas and beliefs against external threats. This drive is rooted in the basic fight-or-flight
response common to most animals. In humans, it manifests itself not just as aggressive or
defensive behavior, but also as a quest to create institutions that promote justice and that allow
people to express their own thoughts and beliefs. The drive to defend tells us a lot about
people's resistance to change; it's one reason employees can be distressed by the prospect of
their company being taken over, even if the deal represents the only hope for an organization's
survival.

So what actions can managers take to satisfy the four drives and, thereby, increase their
employees' overall motivation? We recently completed two major studies to evaluate the
importance of these drives in terms of employee motivation. In one, we surveyed 385 employees
of two global businesses. In the other, we surveyed employees from 300 successful local
companies. To define overall motivation, we focused on four commonly measured workplace
indicators: effort, satisfaction, commitment and intention to quit.

Both studies showed that certain drives influence some motivational indicators more than others.
Fulfilling the drive to bond has the greatest effect on employee commitment, for example,
whereas meeting the drive to comprehend is most closely linked with employee effort. The drive
to acquire is most easily satisfied by an organization's reward system. A clear example of this
can be found in the merger of two large companies, HBES and Phillips Quartermain. When
HBES acquired Phillips Quartermain, it inherited a company in which the reward system was
dominated by politics and status. HBES introduced a new system that held managers
responsible for specific goals and rewarded good performance over average performance.
Former Phillips Quartermain employees embraced their new company to an unusual extent in
the aftermath of an acquisition in part because the reward system was tough but recognized
individual achievement. The most effective way to fulfill the drive to bond is to create a culture
that promotes teamwork, openness and friendship. HBES broke through Phillips Quartermain's
mentality by bringing together people from the two firms to work on well-defined cost savings.
The new culture encouraged people to break old attachments and form new bonds.

But a company can best improve overall motivational scores by satisfying all four drives in
concert. Each of the four drives is independent; they cannot be ordered hierarchically or
substituted one for another. You can't just pay your employees a lot and hope they'll feel
enthusiastic about their work in an organization where bonding is not fostered. To fully motivate
your employees, you must address all four drives.
Questions 27 - 31

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 27-31 on your answer sheet.

27 In the first paragraph, what are we told about the study of motivation?

                   A It is a relatively recent field of study.
                   B It has been restricted due to gaps in scientific knowledge.
                   C Researchers have tended to be too theoretical in their approach.
                   D Researchers have been criticised for treating humans as machines.

28 In the second paragraph, what are we told about human drives?

                   A Satisfying our drives can change the way we behave.
                   B Psychology has taught us most about our drives.
                   C Human drives have changed over time.
                   D Different people have different drives.

29 According to the writers, which of the following is true of the drive to acquire?

                   A Of the four drives, it is the easiest to satisfy.
                   B Of the four drives, it is the drive that affects us the most.
                   C Higher job positions cannot be achieved without it.
                   D It is not limited to material possessions.

30 According to the writers, the drive to comprehend suggests that people

                   A should combine study and work to feel fulfilled.
                   B need to work in jobs they feel are useful.
                   C prefer tasks that are easy to understand.
                   D want to feel understood by their employer.

31 What do the writers tell us about the drive to defend?

                   A This drive helps people to cope with change.
                   B People can learn a lot about this drive from animals.
                   C This drive can be linked to our need to voice an opinion.
                   D This drive may help to explain why humans are superior to animals.
Questions 32 - 34
Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-F, below.
Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 32-34 on your answer sheet.
32 The drive to acquire causes employees to
33 The drive to comprehend can cause employees to
34 The drive to defend is what causes employees to

A associate with senior people in the workplace.
B work to improve their working conditions.
C work harder if they respect the company that employs them.
D take an interest in the rewards that fellow workers receive.
E leave a job that doesn't make use of their skills.
F worry if the company they work for is sold.

Questions 35 - 40

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 35-40 on your answer sheet, write

YES                if the statement agrees with the views of the writer
NO                 if the statement contradicts the views of the writer
NOT GIVEN          if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

35 The aim of the two studies was to analyse the link between employees' natural drives and
      their attitude to work.

36 Employees of local companies feel a greater sense of commitment than those of global
      companies.

37 An employee's commitment to a company increases the most if the drive to comprehend
      is met.

38 The reward system used by Phillips Quartermain caused the company to lose profits.

39 Phillips Quartermain employees reacted in an unexpected way when their company
      merged with HBES.

40 Simply increasing pay can lead to increased employee motivation.
