READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

      Managing the language barriers in international
                                  business

Multinational business enterprises commonly have branches and customers in many different countries,
some or all of which operate in different language. Language needs to be managed as a corporate asset.
There are several options available to multinational companies (MNCS) for dealing with language
barriers, and alleviating the potentially serious problems they create.

The simplest option is to rely on the language of the parent company. Widespread though this strategy
is, however, it is fatally flawed. It makes no allowance for the growing trend of linguistic nationalism,
whereby buyers in some regions assert their right to work in the local language. And total reliance on a
single language puts a company at risk in other ways. Contracts, rules and legislation are in variably
written in the local language and a company unable to operate in that language is vulnerable.

Another improvised approach to language taken by MNCA is to rely on what has been termed Functional
Multilingualism (Hagen, 1999). Essentially what this means is muddling through, relying on a mix of
languages, pidgins and gestures to communicate by whatever means the parties have at their disposal.
In a social context, such a shared effort might be considered an aid to the bonding process, with the
frustration of communication being regularly punctuated by moments of absurdity and humour. However,
as the basis for business negotiations it appears very hit-and-miss. And yet Hagen's recent study
suggests that as much as 16% of international business transactions are conducted in a cocktail of
languages. Functional Multilingualism shares the same defects as reliance on a lingua franca and
increases the probability of misunderstandings.

A more rational and obvious response to the language barrier is to employ external resources such as
translators and interpreters, and certainly there are many excellent specialists in these fields. However,
such a response is by no means a perfect solution. For a start, these services can be very expensive,
with a top simultaneous interpreter commanding daily rates as high as a partner in an international
consulting company. Secondly, any good translator or interpreter will insist that, to be fully effective, they
must understand the context of the subject matter. However, this is not always possible. In some cases,
it is prohibited by the complexity or specialization of the topic, and sometimes by lack of preparation time,
but most often the obstacle is the reluctance of the parties to explain the wider context to an outsider.

Another problem is that unless there has been considerable pre-planning between the interpreter and
his/her clients, it is likely that there will be ambiguity and cultural overtones in the source messages. The
interpreters have to provide a high-fidelity translation, but in this circumstance they have to use initiative
and guesswork which injects a potential source of misunderstanding into the proceedings. Finally, while
a good interpreter will attempt to convey not only the meaning but also the correct emphasis of any
communication, there can be no doubt that there is a loss of rhetorical power when communications go
through a third person. So, in situations requiring negotiation, persuasion, humour, etc, the use of an
interpreter is a poor substitute for direct communication.

The immediate and understandable reaction to any skills shortage in a business is to consider personnel
development, and certainly the language training industry is well developed, offering programs at almost
every level and in numerous languages. However, without doubting the value of language training, no
company should be deluded into believing that it will be assured of success. Training in most companies
is geared to the economic cycle. When times are good, money is invested in training. When companies
have financial difficulties, training is one of the 'unnecessary luxuries' that have to be cut from the budget.
In a study conducted across four European countries (Hagen, 1990) nearly twice as many companies
said they needed language training in the coming year as had actually provided it in the past years. This
disparity between intentions and practice underlines the problems of relying upon training for language
skills. Unless the company is totally committed to sustaining the strategy, even through bad times, it will
fail.

One notable and committed leader in the field of language training has been the Volkswagen Group.
They have developed a language program over many years, and in many respects can be regarded as a
model of how to manage language resources professionally. However, the Volkswagen approach
underlines the fact that language training has to be considered a long-term strategy rather than a short-
term, tactical solution. In their system, to progress from basics to communications competence in
language requires the completion of six levels, each one of which require approximately 90 hours of
classroom tuition, supported by many more hours of self-study, spread over a 6-9 month period. The
completion of each stage is period, marked by a post-stage achievement test, which is a pre-requisite for
continued training. So even this professionally managed program requires a minimum of three years of
fair intensive study of a language to produce accountants, engineers, buyers or salespeople able to work
effectively in it. Clearly, companies intending to pursue this route need to do so with realistic expectations
and with the intention of sustaining the program over many years. Apart from refresher courses for
people who were previously fluent in a foreign language, training cannot be considered a quick fix.
Questions 27 - 34

Complete the summary using the list of words, A-O, below.

Write the correct letter, A-O, in boxes 27-34 on your answer sheet.

      Managing language resources in multinational companies

MNCS manage communications within the company in a number of ways. Many depend on the
language of the parent company, but some 27 ............ are increasingly resistant to this. In
addition, MNCS may have difficulties understanding certain key 28 ............ .

         A second strategy is to use any convenient combination of 29 ............ and language
forms. However, although there is evidence that this strategy is the basis for a substantial
proportion of 30 ............, there is a considerable risk of misunderstanding.

         A third solution is to use the services of interpreters. However, this can be very 31
............ . At the same time, interpretation can only be 32 ............ if the client company is able
and willing to describe the context fully, and unless there has been close collaboration
beforehand, interpreters may have to base their translation on certain 33 ............ .
Furthermore, interpreters cannot always convey the desired overtones of a message.

         Finally, companies can invest in language training, but this has to be a 34 ............
strategy.

A short-term  B assumptions  C transactions
D persuasive  E temporary    F local
G long-term   H accurate     I documents
J gestures    K clients      L costly
M outcomes    N errors       O specialists
Questions 35 - 39

Complete the sentences below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS AND/OR A NUMBER from the passage for each
answer.

Write your answers in boxes 35-39 on your answer sheet.

35 The writer refers to language-training schemes as ............ when there is an economic
      downturn.

36 Volkswagens approach to language training could be used as a ............ for other
      companies.

37 The Volkswagen language-training program consists of ............ of 90 hours each.

38 It takes at least ............ of training before a Volkswagen employee can work well in a
      foreign language.

39 Only ............ language-training courses for people who used to know a foreign language
      can produce fast results.

Questions 40

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in box 40 on your answer sheet.

40 What is the main function of Reading Passage 3?

                   A a summary of language training methods adopted by MNCS
                   B an account of problems relating to language differences in MNCS
                   C an evaluation of language management strategies employed by MNCS
                   D a proposal for dealing with language resources in MNCS
