READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
on pages 10 and 11.

            Manage Your Energy, Not Your Time

                   by Tony Schwartz and Catherine McCarthy

At our company, The Energy Project, we have worked with thousands of executives
and, with remarkable consistency, they tell us they're pushing themselves harder
than ever to keep up. The problem with working longer hours is that time is a finite
resource. However, energy is a different story. Energy comes from four main
wellsprings: the body, emotions, mind and spirit and, in each area, energy can be
systematically expanded.

Most organizations invest in developing employees' knowledge and competence but
few help build and sustain their energy. In fact, greater energy makes it possible to
get more done in less time at a higher level of engagement.

The Body
It is scarcely news that inadequate nutrition, exercise, and rest diminish our basic
energy levels. Nonetheless, many executives don't practice healthy behaviors, given
all the other demands in their lives.

When Gary Faro, from Wachovia Bank, began our program, he was overweight,
lacked an exercise routine and slept for five hours a night. That is not unusual
among the leaders we see. Faro began cardiovascular training, started going to bed
at a designated time and changed from two big meals a day to smaller meals every
three hours. He lost weight, and his energy soared. `I used to schedule tough
projects for the morning, when I knew that I would be more focused,' Faro says. `I
don't have to do that anymore because I find that I'm just as focused now at 5 pm as
I am at 8 am.'

Faro also began taking brief breaks, leaving his desk at specific intervals. The value
of such breaks is grounded in our physiology. `Ultradian rhythms' are 90- to 120-
minute cycles during which we move from a high-energy state into a physiological
trough. Toward the end of each cycle, our systems crave recovery. The signals
include restlessness and difficulty concentrating, but we often ignore them and
keep working. Consequently, our energy reservoir burns down as the day wears on.
While having breaks every hour or so goes against the culture of most
organizations, their value is multifaceted.

The Emotions
Most people realize that they perform best when they feel positive. What surprises
them is that they're not able to perform well when they're feeling any other way.
Confronted with relentless demands, people slip into negative emotions often
multiple times a day. This drains energy, causes friction between workers and
makes it impossible to think clearly.

Deep abdominal breathing is one way of defusing negative emotions. When we
began working with Fujio Nishida, from Sony, he would light a cigarette when
something stressful occurred at least twice a day. Otherwise, he didn't smoke.
The breathing exercise we taught him worked straight away: he no longer desired
cigarettes. It wasn't the smoking that had relieved his stress but the relaxation
from deep inhalation and exhalation.

Another ritual that fuels positive emotions is expressing appreciation, an action
that seems to be as beneficial to the giver as the receiver and the fuller and more
precise it is, the higher the impact. Allocating time for this vastly increases the
chances of success. Ben Jenkins, of Wachovia, has built his appreciation ritual into
regular dinners with team members. He recognizes their accomplishments and
talks with them about themselves and their aspirations, rather than their
immediate work responsibilities.

The Mind
Many executives view multitasking as necessary but it actually undermines
productivity. A temporary shift in attention - stopping to answer e-mails for
instance - increases the time necessary to finish the primary task by as much as
25 per cent, a phenomenon known as `switching time'. Dan Cluna, at Wachovia,
now leaves his desk to go into a conference room whenever a task requires
concentration and finishes reports in a third of the time they used to require.

Perhaps the most effective focus ritual executives can adopt is identifying each
night the most important challenge for the next day and giving it priority the
following morning. Jean Luc Desquesne, of Sony, used to answer e-mails as soon
as he got to work. He now dedicates the first hour every day to the most important
task and often emerges at 10 am feeling he's already had a productive day.

The Spirit
Most people live at such a furious pace that they rarely ask themselves what they
stand for; external demands dictate their actions. We don't suggest that people
explicitly define their values, because the results are usually too predictable.
Instead, we ask questions, such as, `What are the qualities you find most off-putting
when you see them in others?' By describing what they can't stand, people
unintentionally divulge what they stand for.

A New Focus
This new way of working depends on organizations adopting new behaviors.
Organizational support entails shifts in policies and practices. However, one factor
that hinders success is crisis mentality. Optimal candidates for our programs are
feeling enough pain to be eager for new solutions but not so much that they're
completely overwhelmed. At one organization where we had the active support of the
CEO, the senior team couldn't tear their focus away from immediate survival -
although taking time out might have allowed them to be more sustainably
productive.

An explicit contract that benefits all parties will require organizations to shift their
emphasis from getting more from people to investing more in them, so they bring
more energy to work every day. For their part, individuals need to recognize the
costs of energy-depleting behaviors and take responsibility for changing them.
Questions 27 - 30

Do the following statements agree with the claim of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet, write

YES                if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO                 if the statement contradicts with the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN          if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

27 Human beings have a fixed supply of energy.

28 People tend to experience hunger at the end of an energy cycle.

29 Taking regular breaks is seen as inappropriate in the majority of organisations.

30 Negative emotions in the workplace can increase staff absences.

Questions 31 - 35

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 31-35 on your answer sheet.

31 The writers mention ultradian rhythms to support their argument that

                   A we need to work for longer periods at a time.
                   B more intense activity should be encouraged.
                   C the human body requires regular downtime.
                   D overwork may lead to ill health.

32 According to the writers, many people are surprised to discover that

                   A they do well at work when they are optimistic.
                   B negative emotions provide an opportunity to improve relationships.
                   C consciously taking the right attitude can eliminate destructive

                            emotions.
                   D a pessimistic approach prevents them from reaching their potential.

33 The writers believe that expressions of appreciation

                   A should be detailed in order to produce the best results.
                   B help us more than the recipient.
                   C should have a financial component.
                   D encourage others to work harder.

34 According to the writers, people can discover what their values are by

                   A putting into words what is most important to them.
                   B asking what their colleagues would think of a given action.
                   C anticipating how they would react in a given situation.
                   D considering what kind of behaviour offends them.
35 The most suitable candidates to undertake the writers' programmes would be

                   A those in an extremely stressful working environment.
                   B those who want to change but are still in control of their situation.
                   C those where the head of the company is committed to change.
                   D those that place the greatest value on innovation.

Questions 36 - 40

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-H, below.

Write the correct letter, A-H, in boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet.

36 Gary Faro has found that after changing his diet, exercise and sleeping patterns

37 Through working with the writers, Fujio Nishida discovered

38 Ben Jenkins has established a ritual in which

39 Dan Cluna decided to spend time in another part of the building so that

40 Jean Luc Desquesne found that by changing the time that he responds to emails

          A he acknowledges other people's achievements and discusses life
                  outside the workplace.

          B he gets a sense of accomplishment early in the day.
          C he has gone against the company culture.
          D he could immediately adopt a positive technique to help him cope

                  with pressure.
          E he could not believe the favourable results.
          F he no longer needs to complete challenging at a certain time of day
          G he could complete challenging tasks more quickly.
          H he found other workers have responded positively.
BLANK PAGE
