READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

                  New Zealand Short Stories

           Paula Morris, the editor of a new book of short stories, introduces her collection

When I was appointed editor of this new collection, my instructions were to choose stories
written by New Zealanders in the last decade. In order to make that selection, I wanted to read
as widely as possible. I would not select authors simply because they were important names in
New Zealand literature. Novelists who occasionally write short stories were not excluded;
however, those who write full-length novels may not always possess the specific abilities
necessary to write short stories, and vice versa. A variety of people -- publishers, editors,
academics -- alerted me to new names, or reminded me about familiar names that I associated
with other forms of writing. The author may be living overseas, or publishing elsewhere, or
setting his or her work in another country, but none of these were issues I considered relevant.
Neither did it matter whether they were famous or obscure. The only active New Zealand short-
story writer I ruled out of my considerations was myself, as it would have been incompatible with
my role as editor.

I certainly had no wish to separate contemporary stories into those most influenced by iconic
writers of the past, such as Katherine Mansfield, and those following more recent traditions;
such categorisations are simplistic. There was no particular version of New Zealand I wanted to
construct or dismantle. For although we may get glimpses of a society through its short stories,
these cannot set out to give us a panoramic social summary, because such a goal is beyond
their scope.

The stories chosen would reflect the diversity of contemporary New Zealand, I hoped. However,
it quickly became apparent that the quality of the story -- that small matter of the fluency of the
writing -- was more important to me than the ethnicity, gender, social background or regional
affiliation of its author. My purpose was not to ensure every group in this diverse nation was
represented in some fair and proportional way, and there are some absences. Of writers from
the Pacific Islands, Samoa is the dominant presence among the stories selected. This is
perhaps unsurprising given the number of Samoans who have settled in New Zealand over
recent decades. However, Samoa's dominance may not endure. The number of stories I read
by authors from all the many different Pacific Islands, both published and unpublished, indicates
that a new wave of talent is about to become prominent in our national literature.

All the writers here speak of New Zealand, I think, in direct and indirect ways, even the ones
who set their work elsewhere. When writing fiction, says the master short-story writer William
Trevor, 'you cannot escape the person you are ... All fiction has its autobiographical roots'.
Trevor was born in Ireland, and therefore, he says: 'I observe the world through Irish
sensibilities, take for granted an Irish way of doing things... and am reminded of familiarities of
early environment when I'm separated from them'. The stories featured in this collection are
evidence of this truth.
An outsider, after reading these stories, would draw certain conclusions about New Zealand.
They might conclude that Maori, the country's original inhabitants, may live in simple conditions
or in one of the most expensive suburbs; that rather than the clean, green paradise sometimes
presented to tourists from overseas, New Zealand has its fair share of social issues; that our
businesses happily employ arrogant managers and rude consultants; that dwelling among us
are the happily married and the smugly suburban; and that we like sport. Each of these
narratives and many others are presented here.

Of course, a collection like this is partly a product of the taste and enthusiasms of its editor. At
some point, early in my reading, I became conscious of this. A story had to grab me -- move,
provoke, excite, entertain or challenge me, stay with me in some way -- if it was to be included.
The stories I kept returning to were those that would not go away, would not be forgotten by me,
and in this sense, it is a subjective selection.

So, was the past decade a golden age for short fiction in New Zealand? Certainly, it could be
seen as a period of investment and opportunity. For nine years the Prime Minister herself took
on the arts, culture, and heritage ministerial portfolio, quickly implementing a cultural recovery
package of tens of millions of dollars. Furthermore, valuable prizes for writers were created.
These included a residency in Berlin, Germany, and also residencies in locations around New
Zealand, such as Randall Cottage in Wellington, allowing writers to leave home and work in
fresh environments. The decade also saw the establishment of various postgraduate degree
courses in creative writing. Victoria University led the way when Bill Manhire added an MA
course to his already popular undergraduate course in creative writing, and this was followed by
other institutions.

A number of journals promoting new writing survived, including Landfall, established at the
University of Otago in 1947. These titles were joined in this period by ventures like JAAM and
the e-zine Turbine, where many emerging writers get their start. And Radio New Zealand
National, our single largest purchaser of short fiction, continued to buy around eighty stories a
year because they remained very popular with the listening audience. Two of the writers
included in this collection got their start writing for radio. All in all then, there were many positive
developments for writers over the decade.
Questions 27 - 30

Do the following statements agree with the claims of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet, write

YES                if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO                 if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN          if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

27 Publishers, editors, and academics provided valuable help in identifying sources of
      material.

28 Authors living overseas tend to lose interest in writing about New Zealand.

29 Katherine Mansfield's influence on today's authors has been overstated.

30 It is possible to give an overview of an entire society in a short story.

Questions 31 - 35

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 31-35 on your answer sheet.

31 Paula Morris refers to 'that small matter of the fluency of the writing' to

                   A demonstrate how language changes over time.
                   B emphasise her priorities when selecting stories.
                   C suggest that story-writing is losing popularity.
                   D illustrate the variety of cultures in New Zealand.

32 What are we told about writers from the Pacific Islands?

                   A They will be increasingly important in the future.
                   B Few of their stories were included in this collection.
                   C Their stories are distinct from those of other writers.
                   D They have been overlooked too often in the past.

33 Paula Morris refers to William Trevor to illustrate

                   A why some authors prefer to write in second languages.
                   B who has had most influence on her own writing style.
                   C how an author's life experiences affect their writing.
                   D what is problematic about certain written stories.
34 What is Paula Morris doing in the fifth paragraph?

                   A explaining which were her favourite stories
                   B rejecting a common criticism of modern stories
                   C contrasting the content of various different stories
                   D comparing her collection with other books of stories

35 In the sixth paragraph, Paula Morris makes the point that

                   A it is not possible to define exactly what a story is.
                   B readers tend to prefer one particular style of story.
                   C it was difficult to decide how many stories to include.
                   D the stories in this collection reflect personal preferences.

Questions 36 - 40

Complete the summary using the list of phrases, A-G, below.

Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet.

                     Was this a golden decade for writers?

The arts in general benefited from 36 ............ that resulted in millions of dollars worth of
investment. Another innovation was new 37 ............ such as the Randall Cottage initiative.
What's more, there was a development in 38 ............ available for writers, with Bill Manhire
playing an important role. Writers were also served by 39 ............ dating variously from 1947
to more recent times. And two writers in the collection were assisted by 40 ............ which
continued to be important over the period.

A travel opportunities   B technological advances  C broadcast media
D government support     E commercial sponsorship  F tertiary programmes
G literary publications
