READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

      Research into the effects of different teaching styles

A Prior to 1960, most inquiries into pupils' learning skills explored the relationship between
     factors such as children's social background, personality or measured intelligence and their
     achievement in various school subjects. Studies of teachers were largely a quest for criteria of
     effectiveness, and numerous investigations sought links between personality or attitude and
     `success' at teaching. By 1950, Domas and Tiedeman were able to survey 672 such studies of
     teacher effectiveness. Yet there was widespread disappointment with such research, partly
     because so little of value seemed to emerge. First of all, there was little agreement about what
     constituted `good' teaching or who the good teachers were. Secondly, there were numerous
     conflicting and contradictory findings. No sooner had one investigator found a relationship
     which appeared to be significant, than another discovered the opposite effect.

B For example, in 1945, two American researchers, Rostker and Rolfe, both using standardized
     testing techniques and broad samples of teachers, reached exactly opposite conclusions.
     Rostker concluded that the intelligence of the teacher is the most important single factor
     conditioning teaching ability, and that there is no significant relationship between personality
     and teaching ability. Rolfe, however, found no correlation between intelligence and teaching
     efficiency: he claimed that the teacher's personality was what produced good teaching.
     Another American writer, Barr (1961), summarized a massive amount of American research
     and underlined the chaos in the research literature on effectiveness: "Some teachers were
     preferred by administrators, some were liked by the pupils, and some taught in classes where
     there were substantial pupil gains, and generally speaking these were not the same teachers."

C One of the earliest pieces of research dates from 1912, when Stevens made 100 random
     observations of lessons in a variety of subject areas, in order to analyze the number and
     nature of questions being asked by teachers. Stevens's overall total was 64% teacher talk and
     36% pupil talk, figures which are remarkably similar to a number of findings half a century
     later.

D For many years in the first half of the 20th century, so-called `formal' teaching was the norm.
     Teachers taught their classes as a whole group, gave out information, asked questions which
     predominantly required factual recall, and frequently set a common written task for the
     children to complete in a prescribed period of time. It was hardly surprising, therefore, that one
     focus of classroom interaction research in the decades following Stevens's inquiry was on the
     phenomenon of `attentiveness'. A number of studies in the 1920s and 1930s, by Morrison and
     others, sought relationships between the degree of attention being paid by children and the
     amount they subsequently appeared to have learnt. Such research was usually based on
     observing teachers at work, a technique which was also employed extensively by United
     States administrators in the 1920s and 1930s, in order to assess teachers' competence and
     allocate merit payments to so-called `superior' teachers.
E As the 1930s came to an end, it was partly the emergence of totalitarian regimes in Europe
     which led to a shift in interest in the United States away from attentiveness, with its emphasis
     on the authority of the teacher, and towards a scrutiny of authoritarianism itself. A number of
     people began to feel that if dictatorship were to be avoided, children must learn in school how
     to handle democracy. Several investigators examined the processes taking place within small
     discussion groups, and tried to establish superiority for discussion groups over lecture
     classes, but with conflicting results. The movement towards what was becoming known as
     child-centred education was gathering momentum, and as interest in child development
     increased, investigators began to discover the usefulness of direct observation and the
     categorization of child behavior.

F This was when systematic observation of teacher-pupil interaction began in earnest. Anderson
     (1939) studied what he called `domination' and `integration' amongst kindergarten children.
     Dominative acts by children included blaming and snatching toys, and such acts by teachers
     included restricting children's activities; while children's integrative acts included sharing
     facilities and playing harmoniously, and those of teachers included expanding opportunities for
     self-direction and co-operation. Anderson then attempted to measure what is now commonly
     called `classroom climate'.

G Lewin, Lippitt and White (1939 and 1943) studied the effects of different teaching styles. They
     arranged for three groups of five boys each to be taught in very different ways: these were
     labelled `authoritarian', `democratic' and `laissez-faire'. The first two of these were similar to
     Anderson's concept of dominative and integrative teachers.

H Beginning with Withall's work in 1949, there was much greater interest in interaction within the
     classroom. Withall used the term `social-emotional climate' to describe the emotional tone
     created as a result of face-to-face interaction in groups, and, like many who followed him,
     concentrated his analysis of this climate on the study of teachers' verbal behavior. Withall also
     made efforts towards increasing the reliability of analyses, and this important pioneering work
     in the development of classroom observation methodology was followed by many others
     during the 1950s.

I Partly because of the disappointing results of the teacher-effectiveness research, and partly
     because of the general neglect in earlier work of the variables of actual classroom behavior,
     the decade 1960-70 produced a large number of studies of classroom processes, based on
     observation of teachers at work.
Questions 27-31

Complete the summary using the list of phrases, A-J, below.

Write the correct letter, A-J, in boxes 27-31 on your answer sheet.

                     Research into classroom interaction: 1920-1970

1920-1939
Research largely investigated the relationship between children's attentiveness and their
27 ________. In addition, attentiveness was used to measure the 28 ________ of the teachers.

1939-49
Research was influenced by a growing distrust of 29 ________. The period saw the beginnings
of systematic analysis of the 30 ________ which occur in lecture classes and in small group
discussions.

1949-60
Classroom transactions were analysed in more detail, often with a focus on the 31 ________ of
teachers. Researchers aimed to improve the 32 ________ of their methods.

1960-70
The number of studies based on live 33 ________ greatly increased.

A authoritarianism  B competence       C emergence  D learning
E observation       F personality      G processes  H reliability
I training          J verbal behavior
Questions 34-37
Look at the following descriptions (Questions 34-37) and the list of researchers below.
Match each description with the correct researcher(s), A-G.
Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 34-37 on your answer sheet.
34 claimed that the most important contribution to success in teaching is made by intelligence
35 set up an experiment to discover how pupils responded to various types of teaching
36 focused on the questions which teachers asked in the classroom
37 discovered a connection between success in teaching and the personality of the teacher

                                                    List of researchers
                                             A Domas and Tiedeman
                                             B Rostker
                                             C Rolfe
                                             D Barr
                                             E Stevens
                                             F Morrison
                                             G Lewin, Lippitt and White

Questions 38-40
Reading Passage 3 has nine paragraphs, A-I.
Which paragraph contains the following information?
Write the correct letter, A-I, in boxes 38-40 on your answer sheet.
38 the influence of political events on research
39 an example of how children's behavior was categorized for research purposes
40 a reason for research into children's attention
