READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

         The psychology of new product adoption

     John Gourville explores the reasons why consumers don't always buy new
                                                  products

An American philosopher once said, 'If a man can make a better mousetrap than his neighbor,
the world will make a beaten path to his door.' If only marketing innovation was that simple. In
today's marketplace, companies that successfully introduce new products are more likely to
flourish than those that don't. However, businesses spend billions of dollars making better
'mousetraps' only to find consumers rejecting them. Studies show that new products fail at the
staggering rate of between 40% and 90%. In the US packaged goods industry, for example,
companies introduce 30,000 new products every year, but 70% to 90% of them stay on store
shelves for less than 12 months. According to one study, 47% of the start-up companies that
pioneered new products later went out of business altogether.

Experts and novices alike tend to dismiss unsuccessful innovations as bad ideas that were
destined to fail. But surely that's too simple an explanation. If these innovations were so
misguided, why wasn't it obvious from the outset? Why don't consumers buy innovative products
with distinct advantages over existing ones? To understand why new products fail we must delve
into the psychology of behavior change.

Companies have long assumed that they have only to develop innovations that are objectively
superior to existing products, and consumers will have sufficient incentive to purchase them. In
the 1960s, communications scholar Everett Rogers called the concept 'relative advantage' and
identified it as the most critical driver of new-product adoption. Although compelling, the theory
has one major flaw: it fails to capture the psychological biases that affect decision-making.

In 2002, psychologist Daniel Kahneman won the Nobel Prize in economics for his research into
the reasons why individuals deviate from rational economic behavior. One of the cornerstones of
that research, developed with psychologist Amos Tversky, is how individuals value choices in the
marketplace. Kahneman and Tversky showed that our responses to the alternatives before us
have four distinct characteristics.

First, people evaluate the attractiveness of an alternative based not on its objective or actual
value, but on its subjective or perceived value. Second, consumers evaluate new products
relative to the products they already own. Third, people view any improvements relative to this
reference point and treat all shortcomings as losses. Fourth, and most important, losses have a
far greater impact on people than similarly sized gains, a phenomenon that Kahneman and
Tversky called 'loss aversion'. Loss aversion leads people to value products they already
possess more than those that they don't. In other words, our desire to keep what we have is far
greater than our desire to gain something new.

In a 1990 paper, behavioral economist Richard Thaler and his colleagues described a series of
experiments they conducted to quantify this phenomenon. In one experiment, they gave coffee
mugs to a group of people, the 'Sellers', and asked at what price point, from 25 to $9.25, they
would be willing to part with those mugs. The researchers then asked another group, the
'Choosers', to whom they didn't give coffee mugs, to indicate whether they would choose the
money or the mug at each price point. In objective terms, all the Sellers and the Choosers were
in the same situation: they were choosing between a mug and a sum of money. In one trial the
Sellers priced the mug at $7.12, on average, but the Choosers were willing to pay only $3.12. In
another trial, the Sellers and the Choosers valued the mug at $7 and $3.50, respectively. Overall,
the Sellers always demanded at least twice as much to give up the mugs as the Choosers would
pay to obtain them.

In a 1989 paper, economist Jack Knetsch helped to explain why people tend to stick with what
they have even if a better alternative exists, by providing a compelling demonstration of what is
known as the 'status quo bias'. Knetsch asked one group of students to choose between an
attractive coffee mug and a bar of Swiss chocolate. He gave a second group the coffee mugs but
later allowed each student to exchange their mugs for a chocolate bar. Finally, Knetsch gave
chocolate bars to a third group then later allowed them to exchange their bar for a mug. Of the
students initially given a choice, 56% chose the mug and 44% chose the chocolate bar,
indicating a near even split in preferences between the two products. Logically, therefore, about
half of the students to whom Knetsch gave the coffee mug should have traded for the chocolate
bar and vice versa. However, in reality, only 11% of the students with mugs and 10% of those
with chocolate bars wanted to exchange their products. To approximately 90% of the students,
giving up what they already had seemed like a painful loss and reduced their desire to trade.

Interestingly, most people seem oblivious to the existence of the behaviors implicit in these
biases. In study after study, when researchers presented people with evidence that they had
irrationally overvalued what they had, they were shocked, skeptical and more than a little
defensive. These behavioral tendencies are universal, but awareness of them is not.

In a perfect world, companies would know that consumers irrationally overvalue incumbent
products and would take that bias into account when launching innovations. But developers are
also biased in favor of new products. Having worked on a new product for years, developers
operate in a world where their innovation is the reference point. They're convinced that the
product works and they are keenly aware of the shortcomings of existing alternatives.
Companies call those developers 'product champions' or 'believers', suggesting that they have
embraced a world the rest of us haven't yet.
Questions 27 - 32

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 27-32 on your answer sheet.

27 In the first paragraph, what are we told about the current US marketplace?

                   A Almost half of all businesses based on innovative products collapse.
                   B Innovations in packaged goods have the greatest chance of success.
                   C It is a waste of money to invent new versions of products that already

                            work well.
                   D The least successful companies are those that concentrate on existing

                            products.

28 In the second paragraph, what does the writer say about unsuccessful innovations?

                   A Companies should take advice from the experts.
                   B Innovations fail if companies lack business experience.
                   C The failure of many innovations can be predicted from the beginning.
                   D The reasons for product failure are more complex than is commonly thought.

29 According to the characteristics described by Kahneman and Tversky, consumers

                   A compare new products with things they have bought previously.
                   B value new products more than ones they currently own.
                   C give up what they already have quite willingly.
                   D consider price more than any other factor.

30 What are we told about the experiment conducted by Richard Thaler and his colleagues?

                   A The Choosers had to guess the correct price of the coffee mug.
                   B The Sellers valued their coffee mugs more than the Choosers did.
                   C The Sellers had to persuade the Choosers to buy their coffee mugs.
                   D The Choosers paid less money for their coffee mugs than the Sellers.

31 In Jack Knetsch's demonstration, the second group of students were

                   A given a choice of several different products at the beginning.
                   B asked to choose between what they had and a new product.
                   C allowed to keep both of the products they were shown.
                   D forced to give back the first product they had been given.

32 What was the end result of Knetsch's demonstration?

                   A The majority of students reacted in a logical way.
                   B Most of the students preferred chocolate bars to coffee mugs.
                   C Almost all of the students were unwilling to swap their products.
                   D Half of the students with coffee mugs swapped them for chocolate bars.
Questions 33 - 35

Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-F, below.

Write the correct letter, A-F, in boxes 33-35 on your answer sheet.

33 The theory of relative advantage is based on the assumption that

34 The 2002 Nobel Prize for economics was awarded for a study that explained why

35 According to the first characteristic described by Kahneman and Tversky,

                          A consumers do not follow expected purchasing patterns.
                          B people will always buy products that are better than those

                                  they already own.
                          C the 'status quo bias' is purely theoretical.
                          D consumers have their own idea of the value of a product.
                          E innovations require expensive marketing campaigns.
                          F 'loss aversion' can be measured.

Questions 36 - 40

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet, write

YES                if the statement agrees with the views of the writer
NO                 if the statement contradicts the views of the writer
NOT GIVEN          if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

36 Everett Rogers' theory explains the psychology behind the choices consumers make.

37 'Loss aversion' helps to explain why people fail to buy new products.

38 Developers always believe their latest product will be a success.

39 Developers waste too much time perfecting new products.

40 A 'product champion' is a person who develops a best-selling new product.
