READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
on pages 10 and 11.

            The geography of taste buds

 Scientific researchers mapping the geography of the human tongue
have finally succeeded in locating and identifying the sensors for sour

                                          tastes

Scientists have long known that the surface of the tongue is covered with taste buds:

onion-shaped bundles of cells that stand guard for the digestive system. Long before

our modern world of supermarkets and restaurants, taste buds served as a crucial

tool to maintain the daily existence of our ancestors. The bitter flavour of a wild

almond told a prehistoric human foraging in African forests that the nut was

poisonous, and they should spit it out. A sweet fruit, though, was safe to consume,

and full of energy from carbohydrates. The presence of lions and other man-eating

predators also added urgency to meal choices. `If the thing didn't taste good, you

might decide it's not worth it to be out in the open and at risk,' says Steve Miller, a

taste researcher at the University of Maryland School of Medicine.

Much of what we `taste' in everyday life is actually the work of our nose. The

tongue can distinguish only five basic flavour sensations - sweet, sour, bitter, salt and

umami, the `savoury' taste of meat and cheese which indicates protein. Sour taste

comes from acidic compounds, and, like bitter taste, it can be a sign to leave

decomposing meat or vegetables. Unpleasant tartness in unripe fruits comes from

too much citric acid. This is how a tree or shrub keeps hungry diners at bay until its

seeds are mature enough to travel - via the diner's digestive system to a new home.

Unlike animals, humans have acquired a taste for tartness. In the case of the

Japanese pickle called `umeboshi', the plums are harvested when still green and

sour, before the tree fills them with sugar and turns them into a tantalising snack for

birds and animals. Sour cream, yoghurt, lemonade, gorgonzola cheese, the German

fermented cabbage `sauerkraut' and other tart treats are eaten every day by millions

of people.

Only a decade ago, popular myth held that separate areas of the tongue were

responsible for each taste. Referred to as the `mouth map', the concept probably

originated with a German text mistranslated into English at the beginning of the 20th

century. As recently as             1996, `mouth map' diagrams still appeared in

university neuroscience textbooks.

By the late 1990s, however, scientists had learned enough about molecular

biology to turn their attention seriously to taste. They had discovered that thousands

of taste buds cover the tongue, each containing 50 to 100 taste cells. Each cell has

two poles: one end covered with taste receptors projecting from the tongue's surface,

and one end inside the tongue that connects to the brain via nerves. When a person

bites into a lemon, acidic molecules from the food bump into acid-sensitive taste

receptors, activating a taste cell, which sends a `sour' message to the brain.

The details of this process were long a matter of debate. In line with the `mouth

map' concept, some scientists believed that the taste buds in different areas of the

tongue were filled with cells of only one type: the tip with sweet-sensing cells, the

back with bitter-sensing cells, and so on. Others were not convinced and further

suggested the location of cells was not an issue because each cell could sense all
five tastes. However, no one had identified any of the taste receptors, so which cells
responded to which tastes was unknown.

    Charles Zanker, professor of biology at the University of California, San Diego,
and others set out to solve this problem with a variety of biological techniques,
including engineering mutant mice that lacked certain receptors and could not taste
certain tastes. They eventually isolated the first taste receptors - those for bitter and
sweet. Each taste cell, they found, is covered with receptors for only one taste. A
sweet cell, for example, is only turned on by sweet molecules because it only has
sweet receptors. This dispelled the notion that all cells could sense all tastes.

    The scientists also assembled more evidence against the `mouth map' myth when
they found that each taste bud contains a full complement of taste cells. `There are
areas of emphasis,' Miller says, `but there are not these absolutely divided areas.'
Over time, the researchers identified the receptors for sweet, bitter and umami. But
until recently, salt and sour receptors remained elusive. After eight years of this new
wave of research into taste, a team led by Hideki Matsunami from Duke University in
North Carolina, and Zanker's separate group of Californian scientists, simultaneously
published that they had finally found the tongue's tart sensors. This breakthrough has
answered some long-standing questions about the tongue's geography.

    One surprising finding was that the sour-taste receptors on the tongue are also
found in the spinal cord, where they probably monitor the acidity of cerebrospinal
fluid. Similarly, sweet and bitter taste receptors have been found in the intestinal tract.
Taken as a whole, the identification of various key taste receptors illuminates a link
between the mouth and the brain. It also provides new targets for research. In the
past, artificial flavourings were often chance discoveries, made when chemists
accidentally tasted a substance, but now experts hope that knowing the identities of
taste receptors will allow a more methodical approach to be taken towards
developing these additives. New molecules might even be developed to cling to sour
taste receptors and block the unpalatable taste of medicines. The finding may also
explain how tongues, like fingerprints, are unique, making some people sensitive and
others numb to certain tastes.
Questions 27 - 32

Complete the summary using the list of words, A-L, below.

Write the correct letter, A-L, in boxes 27-32 on your answer sheet.

For many years it has been understood that the human tongue is covered with taste buds.
These first evolved as an aid to 27 ............ . They acted as a warning that a food was
dangerous, or a confirmation that it was good for 28 ............ . For early humans, the
gathering of food was made difficult by 29 ............ .

     Because our tongues can only taste five different flavours, a lot of what we think we
'taste' is in fact conveyed by 30 ............ . Sour and bitter tastes signal that food is in the
process of 31 ............ . However, over the centuries, people have come to like a sour taste,
and in this 32 ............ we are different from animals.

                   A cooking      B sense      C pests
                   D consumption  E predators  F digestion
                   G enemies      H planting   I decay
                   J sight        K smell      L survival

Questions 33 - 37

Do the following statements agree with the claim of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 33-37 on your answer sheet, write

YES                if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO                 if the statement contradicts the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN          if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

33 It is likely that the 'mouth map' myth began from an error of interpretation.

34 Scientists were in agreement on the location of bitter-sensing cells.

35 The experiment with mice proved that bitter-sensing cells have more receptors than
      sweet-sensing cells do.

36 After a lengthy period of study, two different research teams reported the same finding
      about taste senses at the same time.

37 Scientists failed to find taste receptors in other parts of the body.
Questions 38 - 40

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 38-40 on your answer sheet.

38 What does the writer suggest about the 'mouth map' myth?

                   A It followed the discovery of taste buds.
                   B It located taste in one part of the tongue.
                   C It used to be taught and believed in academic circles.
                   D It was an idea that originated in England.

39 The writer refers to Zanker's experiment in order to

                   A compare several different methodologies.
                   B highlight the connection between taste and the brain.
                   C suggest that the use of animals in research can be misleading.
                   D show how a popular idea was proved wrong.

40 What is the main purpose of the writer of Reading Passage 3?

                   A to describe a scientific experiment
                   B to inform readers of a recent scientific discovery
                   C to narrate how taste affected the lives of ancient humans
                   D to predict how taste research will develop in the future
