READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

          The search for extra-terrestrial life

                            An astronomer gives his view

Ordinarily, there is no riskier step that a scientist can take than to make generalizations from
a single example. Currently life on Earth is the only known life in the universe, but there are
compelling arguments to suggest that there is life on other plantets. The reasoning is easy: if
our solar system is not unusual, then there are almost certainly billions of planets in the
universe, of which some will be habitable. To declare that Earth must be the only planet in
the universe with life would be a major error.

It is safer to be guided by the notion that we are not special, which is generally known as the
Copernican principle, named after the sixteenth-century Polish astronomer Nicholas
Copernicus, who established that the Sun was at the center of our solar system. While there
is no guarantee that the Copernican principle will guide us correctly for all future scientific
discoveries, it has helped us realize that not only is Earth not the center of the solar system,
but the solar system is not in the center of our galaxy, and that our galaxy is not in the center
of the universe.

If so, then how can the appearance, or the chemistry, of life on Earth provide clues to what
life might be like elsewhere in the universe? Aliens need not look like us to resemble us in
more fundamental ways. The three most abundant and chemically active elements in the
universe are hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen. These are also the principal three ingredients in
life on Earth, with these elements accounting for over 95% of the atoms in the human body
and all known life. The chemical structure of carbon allows it to bond readily and strongly
with itself and with many other elements in multiple ways, which is why we are considered to
be carbon-based life. For this reason, we can be confident that life elsewhere will be
composed of a similar mix of elements.

On Earth algae, beetles, jellyfish, snakes, condors, and giant sequoias all co-exist. If you
didn't know better, you would be hard-pressed to believe that they all came from the same
universe, much less the same planet. Given the diversity of life on Earth, it can be assumed
that life elsewhere in the universe, intelligent or otherwise, will look at least as exotic as some
of Earth's own life forms.

Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that humans are the only species in the history of
life on Earth to evolve high-level intelligence. If life on Earth offers any measure of life
elsewhere in the universe, then intelligence must be rare. By some estimates, there have been
more than ten billion species in the history of life on Earth. It follows that among all
extra-terrestrial life forms we might expect no better than about one in ten billion to be as
intelligent as we are, and even if these life forms existed, they may have neither advanced
technology nor a desire to communicate across the vast distances of interstellar space.

Should such a civilization exist, radio waves would be the communication band of choice
because of their ability to traverse the galaxy unimpeded by interstellar gas and dust clouds.
But we have understood the electromagnetic spectrum for less than a century. For most of
human history, had aliens tried to send radio signals we would have been incapable of
receiving them. Aliens may have already done this and concluded that there was no
intelligent life on Earth. A more humbling possibility would be that aliens became aware of
the technologically proficient species that now inhabits Earth, yet drew the same conclusion.

Based on life on Earth, we naturally take the existence of liquid water to be a prerequisite for
life elsewhere. A planet's orbit should not be too close to its star, otherwise the planet's water
content would vaporize. The orbit should not be too far away either, or else water would
freeze. It is also believed that the evolution of life will involve a planet in a stable, nearly
circular orbit around a single star. With binary and multiple star systems, which comprise
about half of all stars in the galaxy, planetary orbits tend to be elongated, which induces
extreme temperature swings that would undermine the evolution of life. Sufficient time for
evolution to run its course is essential. Particularly massive stars are so short-lived that life
on an Earth-like planet in orbit around them would never have a chance to evolve.

Astronomers often work with what is known as the Drake equation, which is best seen as an
interesting idea rather than an objective statement of how the physical universe works. It is a
method of calculating how likely it is that a particular set of conditions exist elsewhere in the
universe that could have led to the development of an advanced civilization. Doing the
calculations provides scientists with an estimate for the total number of intelligent,
technologically proficient civilizations in the galaxy. Different scientists have come up with
wildly different estimates ranging from one to millions, depending on their individual judgment
and areas of expertise.

The discovery of extra-terrestrial intelligence would lead to a change in human
self-perception that may be impossible to anticipate. My only hope is that every other
civilization isn't doing exactly what we are doing, because then everybody would be listening
for signals but nobody would be transmitting them, and it might therefore be concluded that
there is no other intelligent life in the universe.
Questions 27 - 30

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 27-30 on your answer sheet.

27 Which of the following best summarises the writer's main argument in the first
          paragraph?

                   A It is unwise to assume that life only exists on Earth.
                   B It is impossible to imagine the number of other planets with life.
                   C It is necessary for scientists to avoid speculation about life

                            elsewhere.
                   D It is difficult to defend the claim that life exists anywhere other than

                            on Earth.

28 In the third paragraph, the writer says that alien life will probably

                   A assume a fairly narrow range of different forms.
                   B look like life on Earth due to its similar chemical composition.
                   C prove that having a diversity of forms depends on many factors.
                   D be made of almost identical elements to life on Earth.

29 What does the writer say about the Drake equation?

                   A It has not produced consistent results.
                   B It reflects current views on what conditions are needed for life.
                   C It depends on an unnecessarily complex statistical analysis.
                   D It has considerable appeal to scientists of all backgrounds.

30 What is the writer doing in the final paragraph?

                   A criticising the current methods used to try to find alien life
                   B suggesting people should be optimistic about finding alien life
                   C expressing concern that alien life may never be discovered
                   D explaining the technological impact that the discovery of alien

                            life would have
Questions 31 - 35

Do the following statements agree with the claim of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 31-35 on your answer sheet, write

YES                if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO                 if the statement contradicts with the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN          if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

31 The Copernican principle led people to understand that Earth is less significant than
      previously thought.

32 The reasons for the diversity of life on Earth are still unclear to scientists.

33 It is reasonable to assume that highly intelligent alien life is quite common.

34 Even if intelligent life exists elsewhere, it may be uninterested in making contact with us.

35 People have debated for many years about the possibility of aliens using radio waves to
      contact us.
Questions 36 - 40

Complete the summary using the list of words, A-I, below.

Write the correct letter, A-I, in boxes 36-40 on your answer sheet.

                       The ideal conditions for life to exist

It is thought to be a safe 36 ............ that life cannot exist in the absence of water.
The 37 ............ of a planet from its sun is therefore crucial, as life would find it hard to
establish itself on planets where water would boil away or become frozen. Ideally, an orbit
should be as close as possible to being a perfect circle. Planets in solar systems with two or
more suns are common, but their orbits would be erratic, thus producing considerable
38 ............ in temperatures. In addition, the 39 ............ of complex life requires millions of
years, but stars with a very large 40 ............ don't last long and so their planets cannot
support life.

A reliability  B transformation  C increase
D mass         E assumption      F variation
G distance     H evolution       I stability
