READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

               Toscanini's pursuit of perfection

   A review of Harvey Sachs's biography of the great Italian conductor
                                     Arturo Toscanini

Ask music-lovers to name a conductor, and among the greats, they are likely to mention Arturo
Toscanini. The Italian, who died in 1957, is perhaps best known for leading the National
Broadcasting Company (NBC) Symphony Orchestra (from the 1930s), which had a large following in
the US. Yet Toscanini was an elite musician as well as a popular one. He worked with the world's
most acclaimed orchestras, as the principal conductor of La Scala in Milan, Italy, and as a conductor
at the Bayreuth Festival in Germany. Harvey Sachs has written the definitive biography of this great
and colorful character. Sachs had already published a biography of Toscanini in 1978, but this is not
merely a new edition of an old book. In his new book, Sachs has drawn on a batch of Toscanini's
letters unearthed in the 1990s, as well as the archives of many of the organizations he worked with,
including La Scala. The result is an entirely new study.

Drawing on an enormous range of evidence, Sachs paints a vivid picture of the great conductor.
Toscanini's first job with the baton came by accident, while he was on tour in Rio de Janeiro in
1886, after an audience refused to listen to the scheduled conductor. The 19-year-old Toscanini,
engaged as a cellist, agreed to take charge only after a panicked member of the audience ran
in, shouting: 'Isn't there anyone in the orchestra who can conduct Aida?' As was his way, he
knew the entire work from memory.

Before long, he was leading ensembles all over the world, usually to rave reviews which he
most definitely deserved. Critics praised Toscanini's interpretations for conforming closely to
composers' intentions. Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari, a now almost unknown composer, once attended
a Toscanini performance of one of his works and remarked, 'I come here to hear every single
nuance, every bit of phrasing that I intended, expressed by this marvelous man.' The pursuit of
perfection did not come without costs, however. Toscanini slept barely five hours a night and
went for long stretches without seeing his children. Sadly, but characteristically of this somewhat
selfish man, he did not think it was worth his time sharing his musical knowledge with them. And
though Sachs debunks a long-standing myth that Toscanini once blinded a violinist in a fit of
rage, tantrums were certainly common.

More than anyone else, German composer Richard Wagner (1813-1883) casts a long shadow
over Toscanini's life. Toscanini incorporated many of Wagner's musical ideas, favoring near
darkness in the opera house, for instance, so that the audience would focus on the music. This
provoked fury among Italians who came to the opera house not just to listen to the music but to
flirt and eat ice cream. Like Wagner, Toscanini also wanted the musicians to be below the
singers rather than on the stage, so as not to overpower the singers -- especially important
when performing the bombastic works of Verdi or Wagner.
Sachs also uses Toscanini's life as a lens through which to explore broader musical and
historical themes. He documents Toscanini's numerous appearances in Argentina, then one of
the world's wealthiest countries, and his portrait of the music scene at the turn of the century is
compelling. Musicians would compete for prestigious positions in orchestras, and fights
sometimes necessitated police intervention. Audiences, meanwhile, aggressively demanded
encores for performances they enjoyed (although Toscanini did not enjoy catering to such
extravagant requests). Fearless in his defiance, Toscanini was bound to become entangled in
politics. Tensions escalated when he refused to acknowledge accolades from the Italian
government, whose policies he opposed. By 1937, he had relocated to the United States,
gaining international renown as NBC broadcast his work across North America and Europe.

Some readers might wish that Sachs had included more rich historical descriptions and fewer
specific details. How significant, for instance, are the names of the ships that carried Toscanini
between Europe and America, or the exact mountain he climbed while on holiday? However,
after perusing the wealth of newspaper and magazine reviews praising Toscanini, no one can
doubt his brilliance. Sachs provides countless glowing testimonials, so many that readers might
long for a change of focus. Yet, this is a minor critique. Sachs's writing is clear, engaging, and
thoroughly researched. The book is easy to dip in and out of, as Sachs offers useful reminders
of key figures and explains fundamental concepts with precision. As a biography of one of the
greatest conductors of all time, this book sets a high standard that will not soon be surpassed.
Questions 27 - 31

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 27-31 on your answer sheet.

27 What does the reviewer say about Toscanini in the first paragraph?

                     A He was mostly famous in the US.
                     B Few people know that he was a conductor.
                     C Most people who enjoy music think he was an excellent conductor.
                     D It was unusual for conductors to be well known in Toscanini's time.

28 What does the reviewer say about Sachs's biography of Toscanini in the first
          paragraph?

                     A It is the best biography of Toscanini ever written.
                     B It is very similar to Sachs's previous biography of Toscanini.
                     C It includes too much personal correspondence.
                     D It contains research that is outdated.

29 What comment does the reviewer make about the first time Toscanini conducted?

                     A He expected to be selected for the opportunity.
                     B It was his musical knowledge that enabled him to take over.
                     C He was unpopular with the members of the orchestra he led.
                     D It was successful because he understood what the audience wanted.

30 What does the reviewer say about Toscanini as a father?

                     A He placed more importance on family than his career.
                     B He encouraged his children's love of music.
                     C His children avoided spending time with him.
                     D His treatment of his children was typical of his general behavior.

31 The reviewer refers to ships and a mountain in the last paragraph in order to

                     A suggest how unnecessary some of the book's content is.
                     B point out that some information in the book is incomplete.
                     C show how accurate the book's geographical details are.
                     D draw attention to incidents of historical importance in the book.
Questions 32 - 36

Complete the summary using the list of phrases, A-I, below

Write the correct letter, A-I, in boxes 32-36 on your answer sheet

                            Toscanini's performances

More than anyone else, Richard Wagner influenced Toscanini's performances. Toscanini
integrated many of Wagner's ideas into his work such as using 32 ............ during
performances to keep the audience's attention on the music. He also insisted on changing
the 33 ............ so that the singers could be heard over the other instruments.

    As Toscanini's career continued, his fame brought changes for musicians and audiences.
At the turn of the century, orchestra members argued over the 34 ............ . Toscanini also
objected to requests for repeats of 35 ............ . Back in Italy, he ignored 36 ............ due to his
disillusionment with politics there. Eventually, Toscanini moved to the US where his work
became popular.

A radio broadcasts  B official recognition                C orchestra location
D best seats        E dimmed lights                       F local operas
G private meetings  H hollow                              I drawing

Questions 37 - 40

Do the following statements agree with the views of the writer in Reading Passage 3?

In boxes 37-40 on your answer sheet, write

YES                if the statement agrees with the claims of the writer
NO                 if the statement contradicts with the claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN          if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this

37 Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari was critical of Toscanini's performances.

38 Sachs was sympathetic to Toscanini's political views.

39 Sachs fails to make fundamental ideas clear.

40 It is doubtful that a finer biography will be written in the near future.
