READING PASSAGE 3

You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3
below.

                  Who looks after the children
                         in today's Britain?

A When Simon Baron-Cohen recently published a book, The Essential Difference, in
        which he claimed that 'the female brain is predominantly hard-wired for empathy, the
        male brain is predominantly hard-wired for understanding and building systems' he
        caught the mood of the moment. His team's experiments on day-old babies, and the
        finding that the male babies looked for longer at a hanging toy and the female babies
        longer at a face, has been repeatedly cited in the press since his book's publication.
        However, Elizabeth Spelke is one expert who is skeptical about whether this
        experiment deserves such attention. 'This is one isolated experiment,' she says. 'Its
        findings fly in the face of dozens of studies on similar aspects of cognition carried out
        on young babies over decades. It is astonishing how much this one study has been
        cited, when the many studies that show no difference between the sexes, or a
        difference in the other direction, are ignored.'

B One of Baron-Cohen's other main studies was conducted by collecting and examining
        responses to questionnaires completed by adults on their own behaviour: the sort of
        quiz well known to readers of magazines. The answers recorded in such cases will
        reflect differences formed by cultural assumptions and socialization: it is hard to see
        what they tell us about innate differences. Nevertheless, they have become a
        fashionable reference point, and recently Princess Anne, patron of Women into
        Science and Engineering, gave a speech in which she quoted Baron-Cohen's research
        as proof that six out of ten men have a systemizing brain. This kind of science has
        passed into everyday culture, often outrunning the intentions of those who did the
        original work.

C Social expectations play heavily with young men and women, and expectations are in
        some ways more conventional in Britain today than they were ten or 20 years ago. It is
        particularly when they have children that women find out how society reinforces
        traditional expectations of their behaviour. They discover that many pressures --
        including the work schedule of their male partner and the expectations of his employer
        that it should be maintained -- make it hard to combine work and home without giving
        their paid work a lower priority than their male colleagues do. In such a context, the
        claims about males' greater power to systemize and compete only serve to put further
        pressure on women.

D The pressures are equally powerful on men to continue in a traditional lifestyle. Some
        educationalists argue that among young men the concern that they might appear
        'feminine' is higher than ever and may even hold back educational achievement, since
        studying is often seen as girlish. In later life, the drive to competitiveness in the
        workplace is mythologized as being tied to high levels of masculinity. Men are also told
        that high achievers attract more women, even though evidence shows that as women
        slowly become more equal at work, they begin to care less about the economic status
        of potential partners.

E Men are often held back from making the choice to move deeper into domestic life, and
        in particular childcare, feeling that it lacks status. While the gains in making a social
        revolution were clear for women -- they could gain status and income by moving
        beyond the home -- the gains in the parallel social revolution are harder for men to
        see, since it will involve them in losing status and income. The idea that men are
        naturally less empathetic also produces feelings of fatalism about their role. Yet there is
        much evidence to show that even being empathetic and good at parenting is a learned
        behaviour.

F It is true that, as the linguist Steven Pinker noted, in our culture women respond more
        readily to their children's cries, but there is nothing to say that this is down to anything
        other than practice and socialization. In a culture where most men return to work
        straight after the birth of their children, it would be extraordinary if they did manage to
        remain as alert to their needs as women who remain at home. In one test carried out
        with teenagers, although girls said that they liked children more than boys said they
        did, when left alone with a crying infant, their responses were no different. Women can
        testify to the fact that parenting is a tricky, complicated process, not always a natural,
        easy role.

G However, while the definite trend of a decade ago is no longer evident, the movement
        towards equality has not completely stalled. A more equal sharing of childcare and
        even domestic labour is still desired by many men as well as women. Nearly three-
        quarters of young British men say that if it were financially possible, they would like to
        stay at home to look after their families. And three-quarters of young men tell pollsters
        that the amount of time fathers is allowed to take off work after a birth -- paternity
        leave -- is too short in Britain. The government is therefore proposing more equal
        policies on maternity/paternity leave, knowing that the pressure is still forwards rather
        than backwards. And remember that in Britain, young men in full-time work spend
        about an hour a day looking after their children. That may sound paltry, but not
        compared to the 15 minutes they spent 30 years ago: if the time went on increasing
        fourfold every 30 years, equal partnership would become a reality for their
        grandchildren.
Questions 27 - 33

Reading Passage 3 has seven paragraphs, A-G.

Which paragraph contains the following information?

Write the correct letter, A-G, in boxes 27-33 on your answer sheet.

27 a possible argument for poor academic performance in young boys

28 a comparison between fathers' and mothers' reactions to babies' demands

29 a reference to a change in women's interest in men's earning power

30 a reference to a study on infant behaviour

31 a prediction that there will be more involvement of men in childcare

32 a reference to analysis using a popular self-assessment method

33 results of an experiment on adolescents' reactions to young babies

Questions 34 - 36

Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.

Write the correct letter in boxes 34-36 on your answer sheet.

34 What is Elizabeth Spelke's reaction to Baron-Cohen's experiment?

                   A She is surprised that other studies do not agree with its findings.
                   B She is confident that other research will be done in this area.
                   C She is doubtful whether it merits the notice it has been given.
                   D She is disappointed that it focused on such young infants.

35 According to the writer, why do mothers often put childcare above career demands?

                   A Few allowances are made for fathers to reduce their working hours.
                   B Their bosses are not keen to employ them for full-time work.
                   C They find that the competitive workplace loses its attraction.
                   D The social benefit system encourages them to stay at home.

36 What does the writer suggest about women as parents in paragraph F?

                   A They are naturally well suited to looking after children.
                   B They have to work at mastering the skills of motherhood.
                   C Their hearing is naturally attuned so they can respond to babies.
                   D Their natural desire is to stay at home to care for children.
Questions 37 - 40

Complete the summary below.

Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.

Write your answer in boxes 37-40 on your answer sheet.

                                   Men and childcare

One reason why some men may be unwilling to leave their jobs to look after their children is
because the gains that could come with such a change are not obvious. Staying at home would
in fact mean accepting a considerable drop in pay and in 37 ............ . The conventional notion
that men are not as 38 ............ as women may also lead men to experience a certain sense of
resignation about their traditional place in society.

        However, it is interesting to note that the majority of young men in the UK say that the
statutory time permitted for 39 ............ is inadequate. Influence is thus being exerted on the
40 ............ to review the existing provision.
